m00137

9bb15c33-3971-462f-a9c5-505e88ba363b

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define the term

case studies

.

Explain the purpose of case studies in academic research.

Identify ethical considerations of research on human subjects.

To gain more knowledge of or insights into human behavior, thoughts, or
emotions, researchers conduct observations of participants. Case studies
are the written results of these observations. Because authors of case
studies interpret results within the context of a limited setting and
sample size, these authors often theorize about their findings and aim
to discover opportunities for further research rather than draw hard,
universal conclusions.

Case studies depend on qualitative research and analysis. Qualitative
research involves subjective evidence that is difficult to control and
difficult to replicate. For example, if a researcher observes a
classroom, business, or hospital setting, their observations are limited
to what they observe at that particular location on that particular day
at that particular time.

Case studies also depend on quantitative research. Quantitative research
involves hard, specific data that can be replicated in a controlled
environment. You may have read about health studies that suggest a
moderate amount of red wine or chocolate is good for your health or that
eating red meat is bad for your health. Authors of case studies use
quantitative research by looking at data drawn from a group and using it
as a basis for their findings. In other words, the data, not the
researchers' observations, form the primary evidence.

Another thing to know about case studies is that their authors attempt
to observe participants in their natural environments. For example, to
learn something about customer-service skills for a case study, an
author would observe employees at a call center or in a retail store as
they do their jobs. Similarly, to learn about how people use language,
an author might observe people communicating naturally with their
friends, family, or colleagues. Because case studies take place in the
participants' natural environments, analyzing case studies can help
readers imagine themselves in that environment. For example, as part of
their training, a nurse or doctor might read a case study about a
patient to think about what they would do in the same situation.
Examining case studies helps readers imagine a wide range of outcomes,
while conducting case studies helps researchers discover opportunities
for further research.

# Case Study Ethics {#sect-00002}

Professional researchers must abide by a complex ethical and legal
framework when conducting case studies. More importantly, participants
must give their permission to be part of the study and to have their
information shared. Researchers are obligated to act ethically when
conducting case studies, *but what does "act ethically" mean, exactly?*
Most people would agree that it is *unethical* to inflict harm on a case
study participant, yet there are instances of researchers injuring their
participants either physically or psychologically. One of the best-known
examples of a [case study conducted unethically](#) is the [Milgram
Experiment](#), in which Yale University psychologist [Stanley
Milgram](#) (1933--1984) attempted to study the extent of people's
willingness to submit to authority when ordered to do something they
know is wrong. Participants were instructed to deliver a range of
electric shocks to other participants, who in fact were not actual
participants but other researchers. Unbeknownst to the participants, the
shocks were not real, and no electric current was delivered when
participants pressed the button to deliver the shocks. Responses to
shocks---screams and other indications of pain---were prerecorded. Yet
some participants reported suffering psychological trauma from what they
believed were their actions.

Most people also would consider it unethical to be dishonest about a
case study. Researchers are expected to conduct their studies and
analyze their data objectively, without bias. Over the years, laws and
ethical codes have been implemented to protect case study participants.
If you pursue an academic or career field that uses case studies, you
will learn more about ethical and legal considerations specific to that
field. For example, most academic case studies must be approved by an
institutional review board (IRB) before the research can be conducted.
Most universities have specific guidance on how faculty and students
should go about research involving human subjects and most likely will
have strict guidelines for conducting case studies. The assignment in
this chapter, however, asks only that you conduct an informal case
study. Your instructor will be your best resource to get answers to
questions you have about your college's policies on conducting research
and whether and how they apply to the research you intend to do.
