m00138

44faabe3-56b7-47a7-959a-3e7b51b68701

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Apply critical thinking and communication in varying rhetorical and
cultural contexts.

Identify and describe the genre conventions and rhetorical situation of
case studies.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

"My . . . work . . . has been to unravel . . . the mysterious
connections between brain, mind, and body."
::::

# Ramachandran's Case Study on Phantom Limbs {#sect-00002}

Neuropsychologist [Vilayanur Subramanian Ramachandran](#) (b. 1951) was
born in Tamil Nadu, India. He was educated in India and Thailand before
earning a PhD from the University of Cambridge in England. Both a
physician and a medical researcher, Dr. Ramachandran is a distinguished
professor of psychology at the University of California, San Diego. He
is best known for his work in behavioral neurology, particularly his
research on the phenomenon of phantom limbs.

Behavioral neurology is a specialty that focuses on the ways in which
neurological damage and disease affect behavior, memory, and cognition
and how these problems can be treated. Ramachandran is the author of the
books *Phantoms in the Brain* (1998) and *The Tell-Tale Brain* (2011),
among others.

Ramachandran's most significant contribution to the field of behavioral
neurology is the [mirror box](#), a device used to treat patients with
amputated limbs. Phantom limb, a condition that afflicts people who have
had an arm or leg amputated, is characterized by a feeling or sensation
in the area of the amputated limb. In some cases, patients report pain
in a phantom limb. Connecting brain, mind, and body, Ramachandran
theorized that in cases of phantom limb pain, the brain could be tricked
into thinking the limb was still there. Thus, the brain would reorient
itself (scientifically referred to as *neural plasticity*) and,
consequently, reduce pain. He then conducted case studies to test this
theory.

Ramachandran's first task was to identify a research question, which he
formulated from a theory based on existing literature on neural
plasticity. At the time, little scientific research existed on phantom
limbs, thus providing Ramachandran with an opportunity to gain new
insights into the phenomenon. Aware that existing research suggested the
brain could reorient, or rewire, itself, he posited that neural
plasticity could be used to help people with phantom limb syndrome.

Ramachandran's methods included recruiting case study participants whom
he could observe. He placed ads in newspapers seeking volunteers who had
undergone amputations. He then conducted case studies on the volunteers
to observe how phantom limbs affected them.

These observations, along with previous research, convinced Ramachandran
that neural plasticity could be used to treat patients with phantom limb
syndrome. Based on his observations of a limited number of people,
Ramachandran analyzed the results of his studies and developed the
mirror box, a treatment that is used today to help ease chronic pain
when it exists on one side of the body. Focusing on the connections of
brain, mind, and body, Ramachandran created a box containing a mirror
that reflects the existing limb. The reflection of the limb, which the
participant moves, creates an illusion in the brain, tricking it into
thinking it has control of the missing limb.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

To learn more about Dr. Ramachandran's research, see his TED Talks [3
Clues to Understanding Your Brain](#) and [The Neurons That Shaped
Civilization](#).

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00003}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
