m00140

0867e263-9025-4367-9da1-71d175c1ad80

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Apply critical thinking and communication in varying rhetorical and
cultural contexts.

Identify and describe the genre conventions and rhetorical situation of
case studies.

Analyze relationships between ideas and patterns of organization.

# Introduction {#sect-00002}

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

French physician Pierre Paul Broca (1824--1880), an early researcher of
brain science, is credited with developing theories about how the brain
controls motor functions such as language. One of his patients, Louis
Victor Leborgne, suffered from a continuing loss of speech that resulted
in an inability to form any syllables other than *tan*. Following
Leborgne's death, Broca examined Leborgne's brain and observed some
abnormalities in the left frontal lobe. These observations would
eventually lead to the larger discovery that different areas of the
brain control different motor functions.

This sample case study imagines what Broca might have written about
Leborgne. The contemporary references at the end of the study are those
used by the actual writer of the case study, not Pierre Paul Broca.

# Patient Admission {#sect-00003}

This 50-year-old Caucasian male was transferred from the psychiatry
division to the surgical ward of Bicêtre Hospital in Paris on 11 April
1861. I performed a thorough physical examination upon his admission.
The presenting diagnosis is diffuse gangrenous inflammation and
infiltration of connective tissue of the entire lower right extremity,
extending from the instep upward to the buttock. The patient shows
complete paralysis of his right-side limbs. The left limbs are mobile
with adequate control and power. Both bowel and bladder control are
intact. The eyes are equally focused and reactive to light, although the
vision in the left eye has deteriorated more than in the right eye. The
patient exhibits difficulty in swallowing food, but the tongue is not
paralyzed, and voice is normal.

Introduction. *Broca first orients readers to the details of the case
study: the participant, Leborgne, and how Leborgne came to be under his
care.*

Background and Context. *Broca gives a detailed description of the case
study participant. He notes physical details of Leborgne's paralysis so
that readers understand that Leborgne retains control over his voice and
tongue. This knowledge allows Broca to eliminate paralysis as a cause of
the subject's inability to use language.*

The patient is completely unable to form words other than the single
syllable *tan*, which he most often repeats twice in rapid succession:
"tan-tan." This is said in varying tones and inflections. Paralysis of
the patient's dominant arm prevents writing. Nevertheless, the patient
can communicate to a surprising extent through facial expressions and
gestures with his left hand. His intellect appears normal, and he shows
no signs of head trauma.

Research Question. *In this paragraph, Broca further describes his
participant and begins to bring the case study into focus. The details
he provides about Leborgne's ability to communicate and use language
will be the focus of the study. Broca observes that Leborgne can
communicate nonverbally, and no physical signs indicate that his brain
may be affected. Broca wants to understand why Leborgne communicates as
he does.*

## Patient History {#sect-00004}

Personal History. My personal interviews with family members revealed
that Louis Victor Leborgne was born 21 July 1809, in Moret-sur-Loing.
The town has many tanneries, a fact that may account for his use of the
syllable *tan*. His father is an elementary school teacher. The patient
is one of six siblings. His previous occupation was *formier* \[artisan
who made forms for shoemakers\]. He is unmarried and has no children.
Members of his immediate family visit but have been unable to provide
care for him at home, resulting in an extended hospital stay of 21
years. Interviews with other patients in the ward have indicated that
the patient is unfavorably viewed as egotistical and vindictive.

Description of Research Methods. *In this section, Broca notes that he
interviewed Leborgne's family and other patients in the hospital and
provides a hypothesis as to why Leborgne uses the syllable* tan *to
communicate.*

Organization. *The author uses headings to organize the different
sections of the case study. Main headings are centered; subheadings are
left-justified.*

Medical History. My interviews with family members and hospital staff
responsible for his care yielded only a cursory medical history. They
did, however, reveal that the patient developed epilepsy in his
childhood or youth; the exact age is unknown.

At age 30, the patient lost the ability to speak but did not immediately
seek medical attention. When the condition persisted, he came to Bicêtre
Hospital and was admitted to the psychiatry division in 1840 (exact date
not recorded).

Limitations of Research. *Broca again notes the use of personal
interview data as a research method / primary source. He acknowledges
the limitations of this method ("only a cursory medical history") but
was able to gather relevant details, such as when Leborgne developed
epilepsy, when he lost the ability to speak, and when he was first
admitted to the hospital.*

Approximately 10 years after the onset of his first symptoms, Leborgne
experienced gradual weakness of his right arm, which developed into
complete paralysis in that limb. This condition was followed by weakness
in his right leg and foot. Apparently, it took four years from the start
of the paralysis of his right arm until the patient completely lost the
ability to stand. In these years, his vision and mental faculties also
deteriorated.

The patient remains in bed, having refused to leave it for the past
seven years. During this time, his clothing was changed once a week. The
infrequent change of clothes caused a delay in discovering the extent of
his gangrenous inflammation and infection. At this point, the patient
could hardly move and was transferred to the surgical unit, where I
first met him.

Background and Context. *More details of Leborgne's medical history are
given. Broca concludes the patient history by relating the circumstances
leading to his treatment of Leborgne. This section provides a detailed
account of everything known about the participant and his condition.
Broca doesn't rely only on records to gather this history, though. He
interviews hospital staff to try to gather additional information not
recorded.*

## Treatment {#sect-00005}

The gangrene being too extensive for surgery, I confined myself to
testing his mental faculties and language comprehension. By using his
fingers, the patient was able to respond accurately to mathematical
questions. He understood and responded to verbal questions as well. At
times, his answers were incorrect, such as claiming to have children; I
attribute these lapses to sepsis, which by now was far advanced.

Research Methods. *In this section, Broca begins to relate how he
observed Leborgne's ability to communicate.*

Analysis of Results. *Broca tries to explain the reason for Leborgne's
incorrect responses.*

Lacking any physical irregularities that would cause his loss of speech,
I conclude the condition must be related to brain function. This
condition is so singular that it seems useful to assign it a special
name. I will designate it, therefore, as *aphemia*, or loss of speech.

The patient expired on 17 April 1861 at 11:00 a.m. Cause of death was
gangrenous infection and sepsis.

Broad Theory. *Broca poses a theory about Leborgne's limited ability to
communicate: "the condition must be related to brain function." This
theory will be tested later in the case study and, if correct, might be
applicable to how the brain works for everyone.*

## Autopsy Findings {#sect-00006}

I performed an autopsy 24 hours postmortem and found a number of
irregularities in the patient's brain. A softened area over the
perisylvian region contained a cavity the size of a chicken's egg,
filled with serous fluid. Volume loss affected the gyri, subcortical
perisylvian area, insula, and part of the striate nucleus. I weighed the
brain and discovered it to be lighter than normal. I attribute the low
weight to the loss of volume in the left cerebral hemisphere.

I observed a significant malformation on the left frontal lobe, which I
believe to be the source of the patient's aphemia and, therefore, the
brain location controlling speech production. Wishing to preserve the
brain, I performed a surface examination only, without a full
dissection. I have placed the preserved brain at the Musée Dupuytren in
Paris.

Research Methods. *Broca provides details of the autopsy and describes
the abnormalities he found in Leborgne's brain. These details are
crucial to the study because of Broca's earlier comment about Leborgne's
inability to communicate resulting from brain function.*

Analysis of Results. *Broca further hones his theories based on his
observations of Leborgne's brain. Broca hypothesizes that this
malformation is the cause of Leborgne's condition and, therefore, is
located in the part of the brain that is related to speech.*

## Discussion {#sect-00007}

I presented Leborgne's case at the meeting of the Société
d'Anthropologie de Paris on 18 April 1861, where it generated
considerable controversy. My former teacher Jean-Baptiste Bouillaud had
previously advanced the idea that the language function is localized in
the frontal lobes, with which, based on my autopsy of Leborgne's brain,
I concur. Anatomist Louis Pierre Gratiolet opposed the idea that there
could exist a specific area responsible for speech, arguing that the
brain functions as a whole. Esteemed physician Ernest Auburtin asserted
that specific areas of the brain have specific functions and further
stated that motor articulation is not directly relevant to the ability
to conceive words and ideas.

Advancing Knowledge. *Broca uses his case study to contribute to the
research on brain functions.*

Limitations of the Research. *Broca notes that not all attending the
meeting are in agreement, suggesting that further research is needed to
learn more about the brain and whether specific parts control specific
functions.*

## Conclusion {#sect-00008}

Given my patient Leborgne's success at responding to verbal and
mathematical questions despite his loss of speech, I am convinced that
brain function is localized. Auburtin's theory of more compartmentalized
specificity is intriguing, and I intend to pursue this idea. Leborgne's
preserved brain remains at the Musée Dupuytren, where it is available
for further study.

What's Next. *Inviting additional research, Broca calls on his audience
to research localized brain function. He notes that Leborgne's brain is
available for researchers to observe.*

## References {#sect-00009}

Domanski, C. W. (2013). Mysterious "*Monsieur Leborgne*": The mystery of
the famous patient in the history of neuropsychology is explained.
*Journal of the History of the Neurosciences, 22*(1), 47--52.
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0964704X.2012.667528

Konnikova, M. (2013, February 8). The man who couldn't speak and how he
revolutionized psychology. *Scientific American*.
https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/literally-psyched/the-man-who-couldnt-speakand-how-he-revolutionized-psychology/

Mohammed, N., Narayan, V., Patra, D. P., & Nanda, A. (2018). Louis
Victor Leborgne ("Tan"). *World Neurosurgery, 114*, 121--125.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2018.02.021

Ruane, M. (2013, July). Discovering the identity of a 150-year-old
patient. *Smithsonian*.
https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/discovering-the-identity-of-a-150-year-old-patient-4563869/

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00010}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# Language and Expression {#sect-00011}

One significant finding of Broca's case study was that Leborgne grew up
in the town of Moret-sur-Loing. The town had many tanneries, leading
Broca to theorize that Leborgne's use of the syllable *tan* was related
to his home. *Why is this theory important?* It illustrates how personal
history affects people. It is possible that Leborgne used language in
this way because of his history and cultural association with his
hometown. Culture and identity have a big impact on how people use
language, even among people who speak the same language.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>
