m00141

d5ab96af-834d-47f8-9715-d870374e7c46

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify and implement genre conventions of case studies for structure,
paragraphing, voice, and mechanics.

Articulate how genre conventions are shaped by purpose, culture, and
expectation.

Participate successfully in the collaborative and social aspects of
writing processes.

Give and act on productive feedback to works in progress.

Having learned about case studies and how they help advance research and
knowledge, you are ready to do an informal one of your own. You will
conduct an informal case study profile by selecting a topic to research,
observing a setting and a participant (or participants), and using
specified research methods. If applicable, see [The Research Process:
How to Create Sources](#) for more information about selecting a
research topic. You will then analyze the results of your study to
determine its significance.

As indicated in [Tracing a Broad Issue in the Individual](#), many
universities and professional organizations will provide guidance on how
to adhere to ethical standards when conducting a case study. Your
instructor will be your best resource for answers to questions you have
about your college's policies on conducting research and whether and how
they apply to the research you intend to do. Remember, however, that for
any research you do involving human subjects, you must obtain
participants' written permission to be included in your study.

# Summary of Assignment {#sect-00002}

Conduct an informal case study of a classmate, friend, or family member
to gain insight into the participant's use of language, specifically the
ways in which their culture(s) and language(s) interact. Try to find a
willing participant who is either bilingual or fluent in, familiar with,
or an occasional user of a language other than English. You can focus
your case study on the ways in which your participant changes their
language according to context, how their use of language is different
when they interact with family and friends as opposed to in academic or
professional contexts, or how using one language affects the other. Be
sure to consult your instructor about the school's policy on student
participation in studies, and obtain written permission from the
participant before you begin. If you do not know anyone who speaks
another language, consider these topics:

Body language that accompanies linguistic communication

Language shifts according to medium (text, phone call, email, in person)

In-person vs. written communication

Comparison of language use between two participants from different
cultures or age groups

After you decide on your topic, formulate a research question that asks
precisely what you want to learn from your study. Next, you will need to
plan your case study by drafting questions for interviews and conducting
observations at determined times and places. Then, using the information
you collect from your interviews and observations, you will offer an
interpretation about the participant's use of language that might be
helpful to your college's instructors and administrators. Present your
findings in a report of around 1,000 to 1,200 words.

Another Lens. Complete the same case study, and share your findings in a
presentation that is 7 to 10 minutes in length. See [Scripting for the
Public Forum: Writing to Speak](#) for more information about scripting
for a public forum. For this version of the assignment, record your
interviews on video or use a voice recorder. Play clips of your
interviews in your presentation to illustrate the participant's use of
language. Organize the presentation into clear, distinct sections with
subtitles. Instead of long, dense paragraphs, use short bullet points to
state your main points. Use visuals to communicate abstract ideas or
data. Make sure your presentation flows logically and that you use
appropriate transitions to maintain coherence. To indicate clear
demarcations between sections, use headings and subheadings, as in the
[Annotated Sample Reading](#). In your presentation, include all of the
typical sections of a written case study:

Background/Context.

Give an overview of previous research on the topic.

Methods.

Provide a detailed description of the methods you used to collect the
data. Include a description of the participant and the observation
environment.

Results.

Provide the data collected: answers to interview or survey questions,
your observations, and any other pertinent information.

Analysis.

Interpret the data, and discuss any limitations of the case study.

See the resources below for some helpful presenting tips.

6 Tips to Calm Your Nerves before Speaking

Like, Eliminate Ums and Ahs, Right?

Do You Write the Way You Speak? (You Should!)

Do You Write the Way You Speak? (You Should!) Part 2

# Research Question and Data Collection {#sect-00003}

Within your selected topic, begin to brainstorm possible research
questions, keeping in mind the following characteristics:

Open Ended.

A good research question has multiple possible answers, all equally
plausible. Avoid a yes-or-no question or one with an obvious answer.

Debatable.

The research question should spark reasonable debate around the best
answer or solution. If you think you know the answer to the research
question or if you doubt that people can be open-minded about a range of
answers, it is not a good research question.

Answerable.

You should be able to answer your research question by using the
evidence you gather. You should be able to consult existing source
material on the topic.

Consequential.

The outcome of the debate around your research question should be of
consequence. In other words, what you or others choose to do going
forward should matter and affect others.

You probably will revise the wording of your research question quite a
bit before it aligns with the characteristics listed. Spend time
thinking about your research question, and revise it as necessary to
prepare to conduct your case study. See [\#](#) for examples of how to
revise research questions in various fields of study.

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| *Research Questions*                                                              |
+====================+====================+====================+====================+
| *Topic*            | *Research question | *Research question | *Research question |
|                    | doesn't meet basic | is of some         | is specific,       |
|                    | requirements. It   | consequence and    | open-ended,        |
|                    | is a yes-or-no     | could have         | consequential, and |
|                    | question, of       | multiple answers   | suitable for a     |
|                    | little             | but needs further  | case study.*       |
|                    | consequence, easy  | revision to be     |                    |
|                    | to answer, or      | open-ended, more   |                    |
|                    | suggestive of the  | specific, or more  |                    |
|                    | "right" answer.*   | consequential.*    |                    |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| Sports             | Who are the best   | Is it fair to      | How do colleges    |
|                    | college athletes   | other students to  | benefit---or       |
|                    | now?               | pay college        | not---from paying  |
|                    |                    | athletes?          | student athletes?  |
|                    | Should college     |                    |                    |
|                    | athletes be paid?  |                    | How do college     |
|                    |                    |                    | athletes           |
|                    |                    |                    | benefit---or       |
|                    |                    |                    | not---from being   |
|                    |                    |                    | paid?              |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| Finance            | Should you invest  | What are some      | How are            |
|                    | in stocks or       | things the U.S.    | individuals        |
|                    | bonds?             | government does to | affected by        |
|                    |                    | protect the        | government         |
|                    | Should the         | economy?           | intervention in    |
|                    | government         |                    | free-market        |
|                    | regulate the       |                    | economies?         |
|                    | economy?           |                    |                    |
|                    |                    |                    |                    |
|                    | What was the GDP   |                    |                    |
|                    | in the year 2016?  |                    |                    |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
| Technology         | Are high-quality   | What will be the   | Why do some people |
|                    | cell phones too    | future of          | continue to use    |
|                    | expensive?         | landlines?         | landlines?         |
|                    |                    |                    |                    |
|                    | Is Apple a         |                    | How do people      |
|                    | monopoly?          |                    | combine cell phone |
|                    |                    |                    | and landline use?  |
+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

: Revising research questions {#table-00001}

Once you select a topic and research question, you can begin looking for
background information.

## Data Collection {#sect-00004}

Before starting your actual research, get a sense of the body of
knowledge around your topic. Remember, case studies are about advancing
research in a particular field. For a case study to effectively advance
knowledge, it must show awareness of the research already done in the
field. A literature review section, which includes previous research and
background about the topic, is typically included in a case study.
Browsing trade publications and academic journals can help you get a
sense of existing research. Looking for articles frequently referred to
in other articles is a good way to locate important research, as
researchers typically cite significant studies. Look at important,
groundbreaking research in addition to recently published work. The
information you gather from existing literature may be either
qualitative or quantitative. See [The Research Process: Where to Look
for Existing Sources](#) for more information about conducting research.

#  {#sect-00005}

After you have established your research question, you can begin your
actual study. Start by planning how you will collect your primary source
data. First, review the literature in the field if you have not yet done
so. Next, draft questions to ask your case study participant. The
strongest case studies provide a unique perspective that is applicable
to your specific audience---in this case, students, teachers, and
administrators at your college. Keep in mind that not every college is
the same. Some colleges, such as "open admissions" community colleges,
admit all who apply, whereas other colleges accept only 5 percent or
fewer of their applicants. Interview questions are likely to be
different depending on the individual characteristics of your college.
To learn more about your college and its student population, search for
information on the college website. Look for sections that have titles
such as "About Us," "About Our Students," "College Facts" / "Factbook,"
and so on.

Brainstorm a list of characteristics that make your college and its
students unique. [\#](#) shows how a student at Midlands Technical
College began data collection for a case study on language use.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Create Interview Questions {#sect-00006}

Using your research and brainstorming ideas, draft a series of 10 to 15
questions you plan to ask your case study participant. Remember that
these questions should be open-ended (no yes-or-no questions) and give
the participant an opportunity to speak freely and extemporaneously.
There are no right or wrong answers. With these questions, keep your
purpose in mind: to gather information that will be helpful to students,
teachers, and administrators about how a student at Midlands (or another
school) uses language. Here are some sample questions:

What are your hobbies, or what do you do for entertainment? (This
question should elicit responses that provide insight into the student's
leisure activities and the groups they identify with.)

What new language uses did you have to develop when you became a college
student?

If you have a job in addition to being a student, what are some ways you
use language to do that job?

How do you communicate with friends and family? (Text messages? Apps
such as Snapchat? Phone calls?)

Describe your style of text messaging. (Probe for details about
situations and contexts.)

When do you send long texts?

How long do you usually wait for a response before sending a new
message?

How long do you usually wait before responding to a message?

When do you use standard English?

When and for what purposes do you use emoji?

How do you communicate using voice or video chat (Zoom, video games,
iMessage, etc.)?

With whom do you communicate, and in what contexts?

How do you adjust your use of language in these situations?

Remember to use the brainstorming and research you did previously to
draft appropriate questions for your case study participant. Also, try
to find ways to encourage the participant to provide as many details as
they can and to identify an appropriate setting in which you can observe
them using language.

Interview the person you have chosen to study. Record their responses on
paper or on a digital voice recorder. If using a digital recorder,
briefly note anything you want to review later in writing. If you find
an opportunity to elicit further information or follow up, do so. You
may find it helpful to print the bulleted list of questions and write
the participant's answers directly on the page.

## Field Observation {#sect-00007}

The next step is to observe. If you haven't already done so, decide on a
setting in which to observe the participant. You might observe in person
and/or use a messaging app or video chat to observe them using language
at work, with their friends and family, or in some other setting. The
setting should be one in which you can get a good idea of how the
participant uses language naturally in that context. For example, you
would not want to observe a student playing a video game if they aren't
a gamer. Here are some suggestions about what to note as you observe. Be
sure to take detailed notes during your observation. Consider printing
this page as well and writing observation notes on it. See [The Research
Process: How to Create Sources](#) to learn more about field research.

What are some common words or phrases used?

In what ways does the participant replace or substitute certain words
with emoji, slang, acronyms, and the like?

When does the participant's voice indicate shifts in volume, tone, or
vocabulary? If you are observing texts or writing, how does the
participant communicate tone?

What specific words and phrases does the participant use? That is, what
words and phrases might not be understood by you or others but

are

understood by the participant and the people with whom they are
communicating?

## Analysis of Data {#sect-00008}

After collecting data, analyze your findings and write your report.
First, look closely at the data you have collected, and decide what the
information is telling you about how the participant uses language. You
should have data gathered from both qualitative and quantitative
research. If you need more of either one, interview or observe the
participant again, or conduct more background research. Practice
identifying qualitative and quantitative data.

## Writing the Introduction: Background, Context, and Methods {#sect-00009}

In the introduction, provide background and context for the case study.
To begin, write a detailed description of the study you have conducted
and what you sought to learn from it. Also include the details of your
literature review and the methods you used to collect data (interviews,
observations, and so on). The example below is an introduction to the
Midlands Technical College student's case study on how students use
language:

### Background and Context {#sect-00010}

Midlands Technical College is a two-year public college in Columbia,
South Carolina. Over the course of two weeks, I observed two students to
better understand their uses of language. A generational shift in the
average college student population is occurring, with millennials
graduating and making up less of the college student population. At the
same time, Gen Z's numbers on college campuses continue to grow.
Studying how college students use language can provide valuable insights
into how to communicate effectively with this population.

### Methods and Participant {#sect-00011}

I gathered my data using three methods. In the first method, I
researched literature about both Midlands Technical College's student
population and communication habits and attitudes among Gen Z students,
and I looked into some case studies about the use of emoji. For the
second method, I created a group chat consisting of me and two students
enrolled in the same section of an introductory psychology course. We
used this group chat to discuss the course, assignments, due dates, etc.
For the third method, I created a survey of 10 questions asking the
students to think about and reflect on how they use language at home
versus at school. I then interviewed the students to record their
answers. Using this data, I was able to analyze how students use
language among their peers versus how they use language around their
family.

## Body: Presentation of Data {#sect-00012}

The next step in writing your case study is to present your data and
analysis. How you set up your body paragraphs is up to you or your
instructor. Like the sample study about Leborgne, most case studies are
organized into sections and subsections, each devoted to an aspect of
the study. You have already written an introduction in which you
presented the scope of your study, the participant, the field of
research, and other pertinent background information. Now you can
continue by organizing each element that you studied into its own
section, or you can choose another way of setting it up. For example,
your overall structure might look like the structure in [\#](#), using
your own criteria and as many sections as you need. If you choose
another structure, create a similar organizer to help you keep focused
as you write.

+---------------------------------------+------------------------------+
| *Criterion 1*                         | *Qualitative Research Data*  |
|                                       |                              |
| *Possible Criterion: *Telephone       | *Quantitative Research Data* |
| Greetings**                           |                              |
|                                       | *Additional Information*     |
|                                       |                              |
|                                       | *Analysis*                   |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------+
| *Criterion 2*                         | *Qualitative Research Data*  |
|                                       |                              |
| *Possible Criterion: *Emoji**         | *Quantitative Research Data* |
|                                       |                              |
|                                       | *Additional Information*     |
|                                       |                              |
|                                       | *Analysis*                   |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------+
| *Criterion 3*                         | *Qualitative Research Data*  |
|                                       |                              |
|                                       | *Quantitative Research Data* |
|                                       |                              |
|                                       | *Additional Information*     |
|                                       |                              |
|                                       | *Analysis*                   |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------+
| *Criterion 4*                         | *Qualitative Research Data*  |
|                                       |                              |
|                                       | *Quantitative Research Data* |
|                                       |                              |
|                                       | *Additional Information*     |
|                                       |                              |
|                                       | *Analysis*                   |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------+
| *Criterion 5*                         | *Qualitative Research Data*  |
|                                       |                              |
|                                       | *Quantitative Research Data* |
|                                       |                              |
|                                       | *Additional Information*     |
|                                       |                              |
|                                       | *Analysis*                   |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------+
| *Criterion 6*                         | *Qualitative Research Data*  |
|                                       |                              |
|                                       | *Quantitative Research Data* |
|                                       |                              |
|                                       | *Additional Information*     |
|                                       |                              |
|                                       | *Analysis*                   |
+---------------------------------------+------------------------------+

: Organizational structure {#table-00002}

Provide detailed descriptions of what you observed and the results of
your research. Include qualitative data based on your observations as
well as quantitative data based on measurable results. Be sure to
acknowledge what you do not know or were unable to observe. The
following example illustrates a typical body paragraph describing a
student's use of capitalization and punctuation in text messages.

Mateo's use of capitalization and punctuation appeared to change
depending on the mood he wanted to convey. For example, "what time do u
think prof chang will let us go today"---a casual message about class on
Tuesday---lacked capitalization and punctuation ("What time do you think
Prof. Chang will let us go today?"). On Thursday, Mateo sent a more
formal message regarding the need for the group to study for an upcoming
exam: "Guys, we need to settle on a time and place---Oscar's or Dawson
Library---to study." It's not clear whether Mateo's use of
capitalization and punctuation is connected to his social group or other
factors, as I had limited ability to observe the use of capitalization
and punctuation by the study participants. However, this question is
worth exploring in more detail.

## Using Visuals {#sect-00013}

One way in which an oral presentation of a case study will differ from a
written case study is the number of visuals provided. Presenters are
expected to use visuals when sharing data and illustrating points.
However, writers also use visuals to help communicate abstract ideas. In
addition to images, four main types of graphics are used to present
data:

Bar Charts

. These charts typically use vertical bars to compare different data
points. They are used primarily to compare similar groups to one
another.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Line Graphs

. These graphs typically use one or more lines to show how a data point
(or points) has changed over time. Line graphs are often used to show
trends over a given period.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

Pie Charts

. These charts typically divide a circle (or "pie") that represents a
group into sections that express a percentage of the whole. They are
used to show relationships and proportions of these parts.

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

Tables

. Tables typically break down a set of specific data points that are
hard to manage in words or charts. They present data in a linear way to
help people locate a specific data point easily.

<figure id="fig-00005">

</figure>

When selecting visuals, ensure that they are clear and related to the
topic. A visual's purpose is to illustrate a point that is too long or
complex to express in words. Visuals should have a clear purpose and be
clearly labeled. Your audience should be able to interpret and see the
point of the visual without explanation. Include visuals to support your
work, not simply because you are expected to include them.

## Conclusion: What It All Means {#sect-00014}

Once you collect all your data, analyze it further and collectively to
form your conclusions. Take a close look again at your interview
responses and observation notes. *What did the participant say in the
interview that led to insights about their use of language?* Try to
identify any words or phrases that tell you something about the
participants. See [Analytical Report: Writing from Facts](#) for more
information about analyzing data. *How does the data from your
interviews and observations reveal something that might lead to a
generalization about how students use language?*

Arriving at conclusions can be tricky. Base your conclusion on
observations of consistent behavior rather than reaching a broad
conclusion based on limited evidence. Your conclusion should be
something you notice that challenges your previous understanding or
assumptions. For example, younger people appear to avoid the "laughing
with crying eyes" emoji because it has been so overused that it now
seems insincere. Young people are often the driving force behind new
uses of language. To replace the "insincere" laughing-with-crying-eyes
emoji, many young people turned to the skull emoji to indicate "I'm
dead" (from laughing).

Your conclusion should present your theories. *Based on the evidence you
gathered, what are some generalizations you can make about how students
use language? What did you observe that provides opportunity for further
study?* The example conclusion from a case study on emoji below presents
a theory on how students use them.

Overall, I observed that students tend to be more informal when
communicating to other students in the same age group. These students
used emoji to communicate thoughts and feelings that differed from the
more literal and more widely understood meaning of the emoji. I believe
that students of this generation want to use language in a way that
separates them from their older siblings, parents, and teachers. Thus,
their use of emoji reflects that desire as they seek to change the
meanings of some emoji. Whether this trend continues as students age is
up for debate and presents an opportunity to further understanding of
language use within this group.

# Conferencing Electronically {#sect-00015}

After you finish your draft, receiving feedback from a peer will help
you identify the strengths and weaknesses in your case study. Writers
sometimes find it hard to view their work from the perspective of their
audience. Therefore, peer feedback will help you focus on your writing
in ways that are not obvious to you. Similarly, when you review your
peer's work, react to their draft as a serious and conscientious reader.
What suggestions can you offer to make this case study more informative
or something you would want to read?

Technology has facilitated giving and receiving feedback. You are
probably familiar with getting feedback during in-class peer reviews and
conferences, but if you haven't done so already, consider electronic
peer reviews. Conferencing electronically offers several advantages:

Convenience.

You don't have to be in the same room with your conferencing partner to
give each other feedback. Within a reasonable time frame, you can review
your partner's writing at a time that is convenient for you.

Time.

You have more time to think about your reactions to, and your feedback
on, your conferencing partner's writing than you would in person.

Permanence.

The feedback you give and receive is stored digitally and easy to
access.

Shareability.

Electronic feedback is easier to reproduce and share with others, such
as an instructor or a tutor.

Multiple technologies exist to help you conference electronically.

Cloud Storage.

Cloud storage providers such as Microsoft's OneDrive and Google Drive
store files on the Internet. You can access these sites from any device.
Sharing, too, is easier because changes to the document are saved
automatically. Therefore, every time you or someone else accesses the
document, they are viewing the latest version.

Word Processors.

Microsoft Word and Google Docs have review features such as comment
boxes and Track Changes as well as the capacity to suggest, accept, and
reject changes.

Collaboration Platforms.

Slack, Google Hangouts, Zoom, and Microsoft Teams allow you to create a
space where you can communicate with people in a shared online
workspace. Features of collaboration platforms include file sharing and
storage, chat, video conferencing, and task organizing.

When you are assigned a partner, open their draft and begin reviewing
it. The following tutorial will explain how to use the review features
of Microsoft Word. Other Microsoft Office and non-Office products
(Google Docs and Apple's Pages) offer similar commenting and markup
features.

Open the document you want to review, and click the Review tab above the
tools ribbon.

Read the draft as you normally would, looking for areas to comment on.
Note the places where you can provide positive comments as well as
possible places for revision.

To add a comment, highlight the word, sentence, or phrase to which you
want to add a comment.

Click New Comment in the tools ribbon to create a comment box in the
margin.

Type your comment in the box.

Click anywhere outside the box to save the comment.

To delete a comment, click inside the comment box, and then click Delete
next to or beneath New Comment in the tools ribbon.

## Specific Comments {#sect-00016}

Provide specific comments when reviewing your peer's draft. Vague,
general comments such as "revise this" don't explain the reason for
revision or how to revise. When conferencing electronically, specificity
is even more important because what you write might be the only feedback
your peer receives, unless you conference over video chat.

Comments can generally be categorized as vague, somewhat helpful, and
specific and clear.

Vague comments

might offer praise that doesn't point to anything specific about the
writing, or they might offer criticism without providing a suggested
revision or explaining why something should be revised. For example, a
comment such as "Revise this sentence" is not helpful. Although it
specifically identifies the sentence as needing revision, it doesn't
indicate why or suggest how to revise.

Somewhat helpful comments

are still general, but they comment on something specific about the
writing. They may also suggest some direction for a revision. For
example, a comment such as "Revise this question so that it's more
debatable" identifies the aspect that needs revision and briefly
explains why. However, it does not provide further details about why the
question is not debatable or how to revise it.

Specific and clear comments

identify precisely why the writing is good or needs revision. They also
suggest a specific revision or revision strategy the writer can use. For
example, "I think this question could be more debatable. 'Do college
students struggle with time management skills?' is a yes-or-no question
and would not lead to a strong argument either way. A better question
could be 'How does lack of time management skills affect college
students as a whole?' or 'What should be done about students' lack of
time management skills?'"

# Accepting and Rejecting Suggestions {#sect-00017}

After your partner finishes reviewing your draft, you will need to
accept or reject their suggested changes. Use the image below to locate
the tools in Word you will need to use. You can accept or reject edits
to the wording, edits to the formatting, and comments in the margins.

<figure id="fig-00006">

</figure>

Edits made directly to your document will appear in red (for added text)
or red text with a strikethrough (for deleted text).

To accept or reject changes in a Word document, open the document and
click the Review tab above the tools ribbon.

To ensure that changes you make to the document will not be saved as
edits, go to the tools ribbon, and toggle Track Changes to off.

To open a panel that displays all changes, click Reviewing or Reviewing
Pane in the tools ribbon.

To navigate to a specific revision, click the revision in this panel.

To navigate consecutively through changes, click the Previous and Next
buttons beside the Accept and Reject options in the tools ribbon.

To accept a revision, click Accept in the tools ribbon.

To reject a revision, click Reject in the tools ribbon.

The arrows below or beside the Accept and Reject buttons open drop-down
menus that give you the option either to accept or reject a change and
then move to the next revision or to accept or reject all changes at
once. Be careful not to accept or reject all changes without addressing
each one individually.

When you finish, be sure you have accepted or rejected all of the edits
and deleted all comments so that they don't appear in the final draft.

Check that no red text remains in the paper and that no comments remain
in the right margin.

When you are finished, be sure to save your changes.

# Sharing Your Work {#sect-00018}

Seek out a student conference or publication to present your case study.
Many colleges host events and conferences to showcase student work. Your
teacher or advisor can probably direct you toward opportunities to
present your work at your college or in the community.

For example, the University of Central Oklahoma hosts the annual
[Language and Linguistics Student Conference](#), which is open to all
undergraduate and graduate students. Presenting at a student conference
is a great opportunity not only to share your work but also to network
and gain experience that will make you stand out when applying to other
schools, for scholarships, and for jobs.

In addition, a number of academic journals publish student research. For
instance, [Spectrum](#), sponsored by the University of Alberta, is a
student-run interdisciplinary journal that showcases students' work. See
more undergraduate publishing opportunities provided by the Council on
[Undergraduate Research](#).

If you publish or present your case study, remember to adhere to ethical
standards. As explained in [Tracing a Broad Issue in the Individual](#),
many universities and professional organizations will provide guidance
on what standards to follow when conducting a case study. Be sure to
review these guidelines with the organization sponsoring the conference
or publication.

Another option for sharing is to gather the case studies done by all
class members and, with the approval of your instructor, go through them
to ascertain what, if any, trends emerge. If you and your classmates
think these studies might be useful to college administrators, consider
sending them, along with a detailed cover letter, to the Office of
Admissions, the Dean of Students, or another appropriate administrative
office.
