m00144

0c1f015f-c82f-43e1-9ca3-fb63739d4b97

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify cultural and linguistic variations in the English language.

Explain how case studies are used in the field of applied linguistics.

Explain how the field of applied linguistics has contributed to
understanding of language.

Scholars engaged in the field of applied linguistics seek to identify
and offer solutions to real-life problems involving language. For
example, immigrants who don't speak the primary language of their new
country might have difficulty attending school, finding a job, or
accessing services. One subfield of applied linguistics is language
acquisition theory, which focuses on the ways in which people learn
language.

# Solving Language-Related Problems {#sect-00002}

Applied linguistics has far-reaching implications that affect the real
world. Effective communication in the workplace is one of the
language-related problems that linguists study.

For example, globalization of business means a greater likelihood that
workers will need to collaborate with people from other cultures. It is
not uncommon for American businesses to be owned by foreign companies or
to hire foreign workers with temporary work visas. When different
cultures interact, misunderstandings may occur. For example, directness
when speaking is common and valued in American business culture, but
indirectness is the norm in some other cultures. Understanding this
difference can help workers communicate more effectively.

The work of UCLA professor John Schumann in applied linguistics has
helped researchers understand how people learn new languages. In 1976,
Schumann conducted a case study of non-English speakers. His
observations of one participant, Alberto, a 33-year-old man from Costa
Rica, led Schumann to develop the acculturation model of second-language
acquisition. Discounting Alberto's age and ability, Schumann
hypothesized that Alberto's inability to learn English resulted from
lack of contact with native English speakers. This theory thus suggests
that learning a new language depends on societal and cultural
factors---that is, the most successful language learners are those who
immerse themselves most in the culture associated with the language.

Consider also the research done by [Dr. Kristine Hildebrandt](#), a
researcher at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville. Hildebrandt's
studies of endangered languages of Nepal led her to start the research
project "Narrating Disaster: Calibrating Causality and Responses to the
2015 Earthquakes in Nepal." Soon after the earthquake that year, she and
her team interviewed people in Nepal's remote villages---remote both
physically and linguistically---to learn more about their feelings and
actions following the quake. From hearing the firsthand stories of how
people in the region responded, adapted, and rebuilt shortly after the
disaster, Hildebrandt hoped that the project's findings could improve
outside response to disasters in these areas by considering the
perspectives and actions of their residents. Also of particular interest
to her were the effects of culture on the response to disaster and the
effects of disaster on the social, economic, and linguistic structures
of a community.

## Language Evolution {#sect-00003}

The work of linguists also guides people in how to use language and how
to adapt it to contemporary situations. For example, speakers of English
continue to revise their language to be more inclusive. The Associated
Press and many other professional organizations have recently updated
their stylebooks to refer to Americans of African descent as "Black"
with a capital B instead of "African American." These organizations
considered and debated the change for a long time but ultimately
concluded that using *Black* better reflects the shared experience and
common culture of Black people living in the United States.

Similarly, language is evolving to be more inclusive of people's gender
identities. For a long time, many considered it grammatically incorrect
to use the plural pronoun *they* with a singular verb. However, it is
now widely accepted that *they* is a useful gender-neutral pronoun to
refer to an individual person whose gender is unknown---and to include
those who fall outside the gender binary.

# Linguistics-Related Task {#sect-00004}

To learn more about language acquisition, set up an interview with a
person you know who has learned another language. It may be English as a
second language, another spoken language, a language no longer spoken,
American Sign Language, Braille, or even musical notation. Ask questions
similar to those you asked your case study participant(s) to find out
how they acquired this language. Consider asking some of the following
questions:

What is your first language?

What caused you to learn a second language?

Under what conditions did you learn this language? (School?
Surroundings? Family? Other?)

With whom do you use each language?

In which language do you feel more comfortable? Why?

How often and in what circumstances do you use both languages?

Do you think in your first language and then translate into the second
language?

In which language do you have a larger vocabulary?

When you have enough information, write a summary of the information you
gathered, and draw a conclusion about this person's experience. Finally,
suggest a question for further research.
