m00145

29fe70a4-134e-4723-9dc4-0cc32bddda21

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Write a reflection on the development of your composing processes.

Articulate how those processes affect your work.

Participate effectively in collaborative processes.

Think about the different groups to which you belong. When you go to
work, you are part of a group in which you and your colleagues complete
specific tasks to earn money. When you are with your family, you are
with a group of people who are related to you. When you are with your
friends, you are with a group of people who share interests similar to
yours. When you are at school, you are with a group of people who are
there to teach and to learn. These groups usually have hierarchies,
language terms, dress codes (official or unofficial), and rules of
behavior.

For example, think about the differences between standard English
(formal, grammatically correct English) and the way you or people you
know speak. Southerners might use expressions such as *y'all* and
*ain't*, long considered slang and/or incorrect. Some people pluralize
nouns that would be grammatically correct as singular. Specific uses of
English variants are often linked to a geographical region, ethnicity,
or both.

Variations of standard English are often the norm among people of color,
and people who hold power over social mobility, such as teachers, hiring
managers, and so on, traditionally consider use of standard English
necessary to demonstrate education and professionalism. Thus, people of
color often have to use two variations of English to navigate between
professional and personal settings. A formal, grammatically correct
sentence in standard English might impress an employer but might make
you look out of touch to some in your community.

# How Language Use Speaks to Who You Are {#sect-00002}

Pick a specific group of which you are a part, and reflect on that
group's use of language. The group you pick can be somewhat broad, such
as "employees of Target," or more specific, such as "members of the
University of North Carolina marching band." Ask yourself: *What words
are used in this group that might not be understood by people outside
the group? Has the group changed the spelling or meaning of any words to
communicate with one another? Does the group use any acronyms?* Reflect
on how language is used in your group to communicate ideas.

Then, reflect on how language within your group is used to evaluate
ethos, or credibility, of its members. *In other words, how is language
used to identify people who are initiated as "part of the group"? What
flaws in the use of language would show that someone is not part of the
group?*

Write your reflection in your notebook. If appropriate, discuss your
reflection with another student, noting areas of similarity and
difference. Add this reflection to your portfolio along with your case
study profile.

# Further Reading {#sect-00003}

Colapinto, John. "Brain Games." *New Yorker*, 4 May 2009,
www.newyorker.com/magazine/2009/05/11/brain-games.

"Guiding Principles for Ethical Research." *National Institutes of
Health*, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 16 Mar. 2016,
www.nih.gov/health-information/nih-clinical-research-trials-you/guiding-principles-ethical-research.

LaPointe, Leonard L. *Paul Broca and the Origins of Language in the
Brain*. Plural Publishing, 2013.

# Works Cited {#sect-00004}

Colapinto, John. "Brain Games." *New Yorker*, 4 May 2009,
www.newyorker.com/magazine/2009/05/11/brain-games.

"Explaining AP Style on Black and White." *Associated Press News*, 20
July 2020, apnews.com/article/9105661462.

Guenther, Katja. "'It's All Done with Mirrors': V. S. Ramachandran and
the Material Culture of Phantom Limb Research." *Medical History*, vol.
60, no. 3, 13 June 2016, pp. 342--358, doi:10.1017/mdh.2016.27.

"SIUE Researcher Gathers Stories in Nepal." *Edwardsville
Intelligencer*, 28 July 2015,
www.theintelligencer.com/local/article/SIUE-researcher-gathers-stories-in-Nepal-10441044.php.

Steinmetz, Katy. "People Have Invented More Than 200 Gender-Neutral
Pronouns. Here's Why 'They' Is Here to Stay." *Time*, 17 Jan. 2020,
time.com/5763175/they-as-singular-pronoun/.

Worthy, L. D., Trisha Lavigne, and Fernando Romero. "Berry's Model of
Acculturation." *Culture and Psychology: How People Shape and Are Shaped
by Culture*, Glendale Community College, 2020,
open.maricopa.edu/culturepsychology/chapter/berrys-model-of-acculturation/.

"Writing Guides." *Writing@CSU*, Colorado State U, 2021,
writing.colostate.edu/guides/index.cfm.
