m00131

42563c01-ffee-41bb-98e5-c7d81294a5a2

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

As an author, you will spend a great deal of time crafting your
compositions to ensure that your ideas, thesis statements, and arguments
come across to readers clearly and with authority. The way to present a
strong, persuasive argument is through thorough analysis and solid
evidence obtained from credible sources. Because sources are so
important, creating an annotated bibliography can be a cornerstone of
the argumentative research writing process.

This chapter shows how to develop an annotated bibliography for the
argumentative research project presented in [Writing Process:
Integrating Research](#). An annotated bibliography shows the authority
present in each of the sources and explains why each was chosen. The
information in the annotated bibliography helps readers understand the
role a bibliography plays in gathering and using sources to support an
argument. Later in the chapter, you will apply the principles presented
to create your own annotated bibliography for one of the assignments in
this course---perhaps your own argumentative research paper, as outlined
in [Writing Process: Integrating Research](#).

If you are creating an annotated bibliography, you may not have created
a research log, as addressed in [Research Process: Making Notes,
Synthesizing Information, and Keeping a Research Log](#). However, as
you work through this chapter, consult [Research Process: Making Notes,
Synthesizing Information, and Keeping a Research Log](#) for additional
information about locating, analyzing, and incorporating sources.

By creating an annotated bibliography, you move beyond simply collecting
sources to interacting with them. When writing annotations, you read
each source more closely than you would otherwise, think about it more
critically, and strengthen your own claims on the topic. An annotated
bibliography thus provides you with perspectives beyond your own ideas
and helps you understand where your claims fit into the broader body of
knowledge on the topic, or "the conversation." Annotated bibliographies
help other scholars by providing an overview of the sources and breadth
of knowledge about the research surrounding a given topic.

Writing an annotated bibliography is an opportunity to practice
expectations of convention; there are many rules to follow depending on
the format and style you write in. But it can also be an opportunity to
challenge convention in both the content and the style of your writing.
A growing movement in academics fosters anti-racist practice, which
embraces stylistic choices based on culture. That is to say, so-called
standard language ideologies are no longer seen as "better" or even
"correct." Rather, an ever-evolving idea of language awareness
increasingly allows students and their instructors to explore cultural
expression of ideas.
