m00132

c40a9542-01a2-4e24-94d5-31d12d85abf2

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Integrate your ideas with ideas from related sources.

Locate, compile, and evaluate primary, secondary, and tertiary research
materials related to your topic.

A bibliography is a list of the sources you use when doing research for
a project or composition. Named for the Greek terms *biblion*, meaning
"book," and *graphos*, meaning "something written," bibliographies today
compile more than just books. Often they include academic journal
articles, periodicals, websites, and multimedia texts such as videos. A
bibliography alone, at the end of a research work, also may be labeled
"References" or "Works Cited," depending on the citation style you are
using. The bibliography lists information about each source, including
author, title, publisher, and publication date. Each set of source
information, or each individual entry, listed in the bibliography or
noted within the body of the composition is called a citation.

Bibliographies include formal documentation entries that serve several
purposes:

They help you organize your own research on a topic and narrow your
topic, thesis, or argument.

They help you build knowledge.

They strengthen your arguments by offering proof that your research
comes from trustworthy sources.

They enable readers to do more research on the topic.

They create a community of researchers, thus adding to the ongoing
conversation on the research topic.

They give credit to authors and sources from which you draw and support
your ideas.

Annotated bibliography expand on typical bibliographies by including
information beyond the basic citation information and commentary on the
source. Although they present each formal documentation entry as it
would appear in a source list such as a works cited page, an annotated
bibliography includes two types of additional information. First,
following the documentation entry is a short description of the work,
including information about its authors and how it was or can be used in
a research project. Second is an evaluation of the work's validity,
reliability, and/or bias. The purpose of the annotation is to summarize,
assess, and reflect on the source. Annotations can be both explanatory
and analytical, helping readers understand the research you used to
formulate your argument. An annotated bibliography can also help you
demonstrate that you have read the sources you will potentially cite in
your work. It is a tool to assist in the gathering of these sources and
serves as a repository. You won't necessarily use all the sources cited
in your annotated bibliography in your final work, but gathering,
evaluating, and documenting these sources is an integral part of the
research process.

# Compiling Sources {#sect-00002}

Research projects and compositions, particularly argumentative or
position texts, require you to collect sources, devise a thesis, and
then support that thesis through analysis of the evidence, including
sources, you have compiled. With access to the Internet and an academic
library, you will rarely encounter a shortage of sources for any given
topic or argument. The real challenge may be sorting through all the
available sources and determining which will be useful.

The first step in completing an annotated bibliography is to locate and
compile sources to use in your research project. At the beginning, you
do not need to be highly selective in this process, as you may not
ultimately use every source. Therefore, gather any materials---including
books, websites, professional journals, periodicals, and
documents---that you think may contain valuable ideas about your topic.
*But where do you find sources that relate to your argument? And how do
you choose which sources to use?* This section will help you answer
those questions and choose sources that will both enhance and challenge
your claim, allowing you to confront contradictory evidence and
synthesize ideas, or combine ideas from various sources, to produce a
well-constructed original argument. See [Research Process: Accessing and
Recording Information](#) for more information about sources and
synthesizing information.

# Primary, Secondary, and Tertiary Sources {#sect-00003}

In your research, you likely will use three types of sources: primary,
secondary, and tertiary. During any research project, your use of these
sources will depend on your topic, your thesis, and, ultimately, how you
intend to use them. In all likelihood, you will need to seek out all
three.

## Primary Sources {#sect-00004}

Primary sources allow you to create your own analysis with the
appropriate rhetorical approach. In the humanities disciplines, primary
sources include original documents, data, images, and other compositions
that provide a firsthand account of an event or a time in history.
Typically, primary sources are created close in time to the event or
period they represent and may include journal or diary entries,
newspaper articles, government records, photographs, artworks, maps,
speeches, films, and interviews. In scientific disciplines, primary
sources provide information such as scientific discoveries, raw data,
experimental and research results, and clinical trial findings. They may
include published studies, scientific journal articles, and proceedings
of meeting or conferences.

Primary sources also can include student-conducted interviews and
surveys. Other primary sources may be found on websites such as the
[Library of Congress](#), the [Historical Text Archive](#), government
websites, and article databases. In all academic areas, primary sources
are fact based, not interpretive. That is, they may be commenting on or
interpreting something else, but they *themselves* are the source. For
example, an article written during the 1840s condemning the practice of
enslavement may interpret events occurring then, but it is a primary
source document of its time.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

## Secondary Sources {#sect-00005}

Secondary sources, unlike primary sources, are interpretive. They often
provide a secondhand account of an event or research results, analyze or
clarify primary sources and scientific discoveries, or interpret a
creative work. These sources are important for supporting or challenging
your argument, addressing counterarguments, and synthesizing ideas.
Secondary sources in the humanities disciplines include biographies,
literary criticism, and reviews of the fine arts, among other sources.
In the scientific disciplines, secondary sources encompass analyses of
scientific studies or clinical trials, reviews of experimental results,
and publications about the significance of studies or experiments. In
some instances, the same item can serve as both a primary and a
secondary source, depending on how it is used. For example, a journal
article in which the author analyzes the impact of a clinical trial
would serve as a secondary source. But if you instead count the number
of journal articles that feature reports on a particular clinical trial,
you might use them as primary sources because they would then serve as
data points.

<figure id="fig-00005">

</figure>

[\#](#) provides examples of how primary and secondary sources often
relate to one another.

  *Discipline*                *Primary Source Example*                                                        *Secondary Source Example*
  --------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  *Literature*                Wilfred Owen's poem "Dulce et Decorum est"                                      Essay analyzing World War I poetry
  *Psychology*                Raw data from a study testing the effects of a medication on bipolar disorder   Book evaluating different approaches to treating bipolar disorder in patients
  *Politics and Government*   Transcript of John F. Kennedy's inauguration speech                             Website analyzing the themes present in John F. Kennedy's inauguration speech
  *History*                   Diary of a soldier who fought in the Civil War                                  Textbook entry about the battles of the Civil War
  *Fine Art*                  Native American pottery                                                         Newspaper article about the importance of honoring Native American art
  *Performing Arts*           Recording of a live concert                                                     Critical review of a concert published in a magazine

  : Primary and secondary sources {#table-00001}

## Tertiary Sources {#sect-00006}

In addition to primary and secondary sources, you can use a tertiary
source to summarize or digest information from primary and/or secondary
sources. Because tertiary sources often condense information, they
usually do not provide enough information on their own to support
claims. However, they often contain a variety of citations that can help
you identify and locate valuable primary and secondary sources.
Researchers often use tertiary sources to find general, historical, or
background information as well as a broad overview of a topic. Tertiary
sources frequently placed in the secondary-source category include
reference materials such as encyclopedias, textbooks, manuals, digests,
and bibliographies. For more discussion on sources, see [The Research
Process: Where to Look for Existing Sources](#).

<figure id="fig-00006">

</figure>

# Authoritative Sources {#sect-00007}

Not all sources are created equally. You likely know already that you
must vet sources---especially those you find on the Internet---for
legitimacy, validity, and the presence of bias. For example, you
probably know that the website Wikipedia is not considered a trustworthy
source because it is open to user editing. This accessibility means the
site's authority cannot be established and, therefore, the source cannot
effectively support or refute a claim you are attempting to make, though
you can use it at times to point you to reliable sources. While
so-called bad sources may be easy to spot, researchers may have more
difficulty discriminating between sources that are authoritative and
those that pose concerns. In fact, you may encounter a general hierarchy
of sources in your compilation. Understanding this hierarchy can help
you identify which sources to use and how to use them in your research.

## Peer-Reviewed Academic Publications {#sect-00008}

This first tier of sources---the gold standard of research---includes
academic literature, which consists of textbooks, essays, journals,
articles, reports, and scholarly books. As scholarly works, these
sources usually provide strong evidence for an author's claims by
reflecting rigorous research and scrutiny by experts in the field. These
types of sources are most often published, sponsored, or supported by
academic institutions, often a university or an academic association
such as the Modern Language Association (MLA). Such associations exist
to encourage research and collaboration within their discipline, mostly
through publications and conferences. To be published, academic works
must pass through a rigorous process called peer review, in which
scholars in the field evaluate it anonymously. You can find
peer-reviewed academic sources in library catalogs, in article
databases, and through Google Scholar online. Sometimes these sources
require a subscription to access, but students often receive access
through their school.

Academic articles, particularly in the social and other sciences,
generally have most or all of the following sections, a structure you
might recognize if you have written lab reports in science classes:

Abstract

. This short summary covers the purpose, methods, and findings of the
paper. It may discuss briefly the implications or significance of the
research.

Introduction

. The main part of the paper begins with an introduction that presents
the issue or main idea addressed by the research, establishes its
importance, and poses the author's thesis.

Review

. Next comes an overview of previous academic research related to the
topic, including a synthesis that makes a case for why the research is
important and necessary.

Data

and

Methods

. The main part of the original research begins with a description of
the data and methods used, including what data or information the author
collected and how the author used it.

Results

. Data and methods are followed by results, detailing the significant
findings from the experiment or research.

Conclusion

. In the conclusion, the author discusses the results in the context of
the bigger picture, explaining the author's position on how these
results relate to the earlier review of literature and their
significance in the broad scope of the topic. The author also may
propose future research needs or point out unanswered questions.

Works Cited or References

. The paper ends with a list of all sources the author used in the
research, including the review of literature. This often-overlooked
portion of the composition is critical in evaluating the credibility of
any paper that involves research.

<figure id="fig-00007">

</figure>

## Credible Nonacademic Sources {#sect-00009}

These sources, including articles, books, and reports, are second in
authority only to peer-reviewed academic publications. Credible
nonacademic sources are often about current events or discoveries not
yet reviewed in academic circles and often provide a wider-ranging
outlook on your topic. Peer-reviewed texts tend to be narrow and
specific, whereas nonacademic texts from well-researched sources are
often more accessible and can offer a broader perspective. These three
major categories generally provide quality sources:

Information, white papers, and reports from government and international
agencies such as the

United Nations

, the

World Health Organization

, and the United States government

Longer articles and reports from major newspapers, broadcast media, and
magazines that are well regarded in academic circles, including the

New York Times

, the

Wall Street Journal

, the BBC, and the

Economist

Nonacademic books written by authors with expertise and credentials, who
support their ideas with well-sourced information

To find nonacademic sources, search for .gov or .org sites related to
your topic. A word of caution, however: know that sources ending in .org
are often advocacy sites and, consequently, inherently biased toward
whatever cause they are advocating. You also can look at academic
article databases and search articles from major newspapers and
magazines, both of which can be found online.

<figure id="fig-00008">

</figure>

## Short Informational Texts from Credible Websites and Periodicals {#sect-00010}

The next most authoritative sources are shorter newspaper articles or
other pieces on credible websites. These articles tend to be limited in
scope, as their authors report on a single issue or event. Although they
do not often provide in-depth analysis, they can be a source of credible
facts to support your argument. Alternatively, they can point you in the
direction of more detailed or rigorous sources that will enhance your
research by tracing the original texts or sources on which the articles
are based. Usually, you can find these sources through Internet
searches, but sometimes you may have difficulty determining their
credibility.

## Judging Credibility {#sect-00011}

To judge credibility, begin by looking for the author or organization
publishing the information. Most periodical compositions contain a short
"About the Author" blurb at the beginning or end of the article and
often include a link to the author's credentials or to more information
about them. Using this information, you can begin to determine their
expertise and, potentially, any agenda the author or organization may
have. For example, expect a piece discussing side effects of medical
marijuana written by a doctor to present more expertise than the same
piece written by a political lobbyist. You also can determine whether
bias is present; for example, the organization may promote a particular
way of thinking or have an agenda that will influence the content and
language of the composition. In general, look for articles written with
neutral expertise.

## The CRAAP Test {#sect-00012}

You may find the CRAAP test a helpful and easy-to-remember tool for
testing credibility. This checklist provides you with a method for
evaluating any source for both reliability and credibility. CRAAP stands
for Currency, Relevance, Authority, Accuracy, and Purpose. The CRAAP
test, as shown in [\#](#), includes questions that can be asked of any
source.

+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| Currency  | When was the information published, revised, or updated? |
|           |                                                          |
|           | Does your topic require current information?             |
|           |                                                          |
|           | Are links within the source current?                     |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| Relevance | Does the information relate to your topic or support     |
|           | your thesis?                                             |
|           |                                                          |
|           | Who is the intended audience of the source?              |
|           |                                                          |
|           | What is the purpose of the source?                       |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| Authority | Who is the publisher, sponsor, or source?                |
|           |                                                          |
|           | What are the author's credentials and/or qualifications? |
|           |                                                          |
|           | Does the URL reveal anything about the source?           |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| Accuracy  | Where does the information come from?                    |
|           |                                                          |
|           | What evidence is used to support the information, and    |
|           | can it be verified?                                      |
|           |                                                          |
|           | Are there elements of bias?                              |
|           |                                                          |
|           | Has the information been reviewed?                       |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| Purpose   | What is the author's purpose for creating the source?    |
|           |                                                          |
|           | Is the information based on facts, opinion, or           |
|           | propaganda?                                              |
|           |                                                          |
|           | What biases are present? Are biases recognized?          |
+-----------+----------------------------------------------------------+

: CRAAP test questions {#table-00002}

## Sources with Clear Bias or Unclear Authority {#sect-00013}

The final type of source encompasses nearly everything else. Although
they cannot be considered credible or valid to support your argument or
claims, these sources are not necessarily useless. Especially when you
are compiling sources at the beginning of a project, those with clear
bias or unclear authority can be useful as you explore all facets of a
topic, including positions within an argument. These sources also can
help you identify topics on which to base your search terms and can even
point you toward more credible sources.

<figure id="fig-00010">

</figure>

# Locating Sources {#sect-00014}

Academic article databases are the best starting places for finding
sources. There are too many databases to cover them all in this chapter,
but you would be wise to familiarize yourself with those to which you
have access through your school or program. For further information on
databases, see [The Research Process: Where to Look for Existing
Sources](#). In the long run, this knowledge will save you a good deal
of time and a possible headache.

You will want to start with your college library website, which includes
access to sources paid for by your institution. As a student, you should
be able to access these quickly and easily. Another popular and
wide-ranging database is [Google Scholar](#). Google Scholar is helpful
for finding sources across a wide range of topics. One drawback,
however, is that it catalogues nearly all disciplines, so the results
can be vast and unfocused. Therefore, when using Google Scholar, be as
specific as possible, and add your academic discipline as a keyword. For
example, when searching for information on climate change, add the
keyword "environment" or "politics" depending on your research angle;
otherwise, the results will include all disciplines and potentially bury
the articles you seek. Google Scholar also has a feature labeled "Cited
by," which shows you other papers that cite the article in their review
of literature relate to the topic. [Writing Process: Informing and
Analyzing](#) contains more information about focusing your searches.
Like clues to a mystery, one search can lead you to a wealth of related
articles.

When you are able to identify potential sources by reading their
abstracts or using Google Scholar, you may at times land on a
publisher's website that requires you to pay to read the full article.
When you find yourself in a situation such as this, record information
about the article---author(s), article title, journal title, publication
date. It is likely that you will be able to use your school's database
to access the article. For information about other databases, consult
[The Research Process: Where to Look for Existing Sources](#).

Just as writing is recursive, requiring you to go back and forth between
different stages of the process, you will likely return to your
annotated bibliography at different points. You may begin by looking for
sources related to your topic, or you may choose or narrow your topic
after an initial database search for sources. If your project has a
variety of possible topics, you may even start with a current issue of a
leading journal in the field, find an article that interests you, and
use that article to shape your topic selection. As a bonus, you will
have your first reputable source. Later, as you refine your thesis,
reasoning, and evidence, you may find yourself returning to your search
for sources. Consider this hypothetical situation: You are developing an
argument that examines the risk factors of childhood trauma that surface
in later life. As you analyze the data from your sources, it occurs to
you to find out whether any documented correlation exists between early
trauma and resilience. So you return to Google Scholar and your
university's academic database to find more research based on this idea
in order to revise your analysis by adding the new viewpoint.

One difficulty may be homing in on the keywords that will lead you to
the sources you need. At this point, sources from the last two
categories discussed may come into play: short pieces from credible
websites and newspapers and other texts with clear bias or unclear
authority. Less credible sources may lead you to better ones,
particularly if you can identify the keywords used in them and then
apply those keywords within academic databases. For more on developing
useful keywords, consult [The Research Process: Where to Look for
Existing Sources](#).

## Boolean Operators {#sect-00015}

Keyword searches can become frustrating, either yielding so much
information that it seems impossible to sort through or narrowing the
search so much that you miss important potential sources. One way to
remedy this situation is to become familiar with Boolean operators, the
basis of mathematical sets and database logic. Rather than searching
with natural language only, you can use these operators to focus your
search. The three basic Boolean operators are *AND*, *OR*, and *NOT*.
Using these operators helps you search by linking necessary information,
excluding irrelevant information, and focusing information. For example,
if you have some pieces of information from tertiary sources, you may be
able to use Boolean operators to find additional useful sources. A
search string such as *artificial intelligence (title) AND Buiten
(author) AND 2019 (year)* can yield the exact journal source you need.
Here is a brief review of how to use the three operators:

Use

AND

to narrow search results and tell the database to include

all

search terms in finding sources. If you want to find sources that
include all of the search terms entered, use the AND operator. In

, the darkest blue triangular section in the center of the Venn diagram
represents the result set for this search, including all three terms. In
many databases, including Google, AND is implied between each word. To
exclude AND, use quotation marks. For example, Google would translate
the search term

ethics artificial intelligence

as

ethics AND artificial AND intelligence

. To make your phrases more specific, use the AND operator combined with
quotation marks:

"ethics" AND "artificial intelligence"

.

<figure id="fig-00011">

</figure>

Use

OR

to connect two or more similar concepts and broaden your results,
telling the search engine that any of your search terms can appear in
the results it gives you. The Boolean operator OR is represented by

. Using the OR operator gives you a very large set of results.

<figure id="fig-00012">

</figure>

Use

NOT

to exclude results from a search. This operator can help you narrow your
search, telling the search engine to ignore names or words you do not
want included in your results. For example, if you know you don't want
self-driving cars in your search results, you might search for

"artificial intelligence" NOT "self-driving cars"

.

# Choosing Sources {#sect-00016}

Choosing sources to include in your annotated bibliography may seem
overwhelming. However, if you can find a few good academic articles as a
starting point, use them to guide your research. Academic articles are
efficient, scrutinized by experts in their fields, and organized in ways
that aid readers in identifying key findings that relate to their
argument. The following tips will help you choose solid sources to guide
your research:

Look for relevant scholarly articles.

Even the briefest Google search can yield an overwhelming amount of
content. Sift through it by looking first through academic databases to
find high-quality sources relevant to your research.

Read abstracts.

As you sift through scholarly articles, you can get a good idea of what
each one is about by reading the abstract. It includes the findings and
will show you in about 100 words whether the paper holds relevance to
your research.

Skim.

Once you have determined that an article may be useful, skim each
section to glean the information you need. Closer and more extensive
reading can come later as you develop and support your argument.

Avoid getting bogged down

in technical information or industry-specific jargon. The benefit of
reading peer-reviewed research is that you know the reviewers have
determined it to be solidly constructed. Therefore, even if you don't
understand some portions completely, you can still feel confident about
using relevant information from the article.

Work smarter

by using the research provided. Once you have identified an article that
is helpful to your research, use it to find more like it. Search for
other publications by the authors; researchers often spend much of their
careers researching one overarching topic or theme. Use the review of
literature to identify related articles that may add to your research.
You can also use the article's bibliography to find additional sources.
Or reverse engineer the process: use article databases to find other
articles that cite the article in their literature reviews.
