m00133

0befe4ed-ce0c-42d7-b5e1-b534ee27a7f0

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Successfully apply citation conventions to your writing, understanding
the ideas of intellectual property that motivate their use.

Compose texts that integrate the writer's ideas with ideas from related
sources.

# Citation Styles {#sect-00002}

Academic writing encompasses a variety of citation styles. Depending on
the type of source, most of these styles include varieties of similar
information: author's name, title of work, publisher, location of
publishing company, journal, website link, and sometimes the DOI
(digital object identifier). The citation style you choose often will
coincide with the academic discipline involved. Major citation styles
include the following:

American Psychological Association (APA)

: Often used in education, psychology, and science fields

Modern Language Association (MLA)

: Often used in humanities fields

Chicago

or

Turabian Style

: Often used in business, history, and fine arts fields

Your instructor most often will assign a particular style for students
to use. In this book, for example, the primary focus is on [MLA
Documentation and Format](#), although [APA Documentation and Style](#)
is covered as well.

You can also visit the official [MLA Style Center](#). Another excellent
and comprehensive source on citation format is [Purdue University's
Online Writing Lab](#) (OWL). A citation in MLA format of a website with
no listed author name would look like the following example:

"Food Preparation Workers." *Occupational Outlook Handbook*, U.S. Bureau
of Labor Statistics, 1 Sept. 2020,
www.bls.gov/ooh/food-preparation-and-serving/food-preparation-workers.htm.

# Annotated Citations {#sect-00003}

An annotated bibliography goes further than the citation entry.
Beginning with the formal citation as shown above, it continues with
information about the text, discussing the work's author(s), authority,
and impact on or usefulness to the research project. Most annotated
bibliographies also present a short critical analysis of the source.
Annotations are written in paragraph form. Depending on the purpose of
your project and the instructions given, your annotations may range from
relatively simple summaries to thorough analyses of your sources and how
you will use them. Typically, you will provide this information in one
or two paragraphs of around 100 to 200 words total.

Look at the following sample annotation, which is two paragraphs long
and consists of just over 150 words. It not only establishes the
credibility of the publisher of the website, in this case a United
States government organization, but also summarizes the conclusions of
the source, including an analysis of future projections for this and
similar occupations. It also reflects on how the source contributes to
the research and how it helps shape the argument proposed in the
research project.

"Food Preparation Workers." *Occupational Outlook Handbook*, U.S. Bureau
of Labor Statistics, 1 Sept. 2020,
www.bls.gov/ooh/food-preparation-and-serving/food-preparation-workers.htm.

Authority: This web page is produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
part of the United States Department of Labor. This agency collects and
disseminates the latest economic and employment data, including figures
on employment and wages. The report provides information such as
education needed, median pay, most recent data regarding number of jobs,
and employment outlook for the next 10 years.

The web page concludes that the occupational outlook of this profession
is declining slightly, with an anticipated 1 percent decline in
employment over the 10 years following the publication date, largely as
a result of folding food preparation into the duties of counter workers.
However, it also projects that employment in the combined occupations of
cooks and food preparation workers will increase 7 percent over the same
period of time. This source supports the project's claim that technical
education in food services provides beneficial training that leads to
employment and helps shape the argument for better funding for technical
schools.

Annotated bibliographies are usually ordered alphabetically by the first
word in the citation, often the author's last name. In very long lists
of citations, you may choose to organize entries by topic, arranging
sources into groups that address the topic from similar perspectives or
focuses. The entirety of the annotation should be indented. Only the
beginning of the source citation, typically the author's last name, is
left-aligned. Your paragraphs should be objective, offering comment and
criticism based on the reliability, validity, and bias present rather
than on your agreement or disagreement with the ideas. Although you can
state opinions, do so in the context of the larger project, and provide
explanations.

## Functions of an Annotated Bibliography {#sect-00004}

The function of an annotated bibliography can vary according to the
purpose of the writing and the stage at which it is completed. These
functions often include

providing a review of literature for research related to a argument;

formulating a thesis, particularly if you compile the annotated
bibliography at the beginning of the writing process;

demonstrating the amount and quality of your research on a subject or
topic;

providing examples of sources of information available on a topic; and

supplying items and publications of interest to readers or other
researchers.

## Parts of an Annotated Bibliography {#sect-00005}

An annotated bibliography allows readers to determine the scope and
credibility of the sources you have used in your research. Each
annotation goes beyond a summary of the source, providing information
that helps readers determine whether to read the entire work. In other
words, if someone else were researching the same or a similar topic,
your annotations would help them decide whether the sources would be
useful and why. Occasionally, confusion may arise about the function and
purpose of abstracts versus annotations. As defined, an *abstract* is a
purely descriptive summary, typically found at the very beginning of a
journal article or in a periodical index. Abstracts are usually short,
intended to provide readers with a concise understanding of a paper's
basic content, research, and findings. Although *annotations* also can
be descriptive, informative, and similarly brief, they are usually
evaluative and critical.

A useful and thorough annotation contains three basic parts:

A

summary

of the source, detailing the topic(s), major arguments and claims, and
main ideas discussed.

An

evaluation

of the source's usefulness to your argument, its validity, its
reliability, and any bias present. When you evaluate sources, you
discuss the authors and their credentials, any agendas present, and the
sources' goals.

A

reflection

on how the source fits into the puzzle of your research project. You
will examine how it shapes your argument and influences your thinking
about the topic.

## Create an Annotation {#sect-00006}

With these guidelines and information in mind, you can create an
annotation. First, write a summary of typically no more than one or two
sentences. Include the name of the author of the work, when and where it
was written, and a general description of the content. Here you will
need to paraphrase, or explain the essential information of the text in
your own words. The rest of the annotation is an analysis of the source
and a reflection on how you will use it. The evaluation assesses the
source's quality and relevance to your topic. Although you often
complete an annotated bibliography at the culmination of a work, the
analytic nature of the annotated bibliography means that working on it
as part of the prewriting process can help you shape your ideas, learn
more about your topic, write a thesis, and determine which sources to
use while formulating your argument.

# Using Sources in Academic Conversation {#sect-00007}

Academic writing, particularly an assignment in which you create an
argument---a persuasive text using one or more appeals---to support a
claim to support a claim through reasoning and evidence, is somewhat
like joining a conversation, as mentioned in the introduction to this
chapter. You contribute your own ideas to an issue, support your claim
by citing other sources on the topic, refute counterclaims, and create
meaningful rhetorical appeals. With these contributions, you add your
writing to the database of knowledge and opinion regarding that topic.
See [Glance at Genre: Introducing Research as Evidence](#) for a more
detailed discussion of authors in conversation. As you think about
creating your annotated bibliography, keep this conversation in mind.

One way to use sources is to find those that agree with your position
and perhaps even those that argue the point in a similar way. While
using sources like these isn't necessarily a problem, creating a
rhetorical argument is more than simply repeating existing research, no
matter how solid or well-regarded it may be. Therefore, try to expand
your compilation to include sources that not only provide strong
evidence for your claim but also challenge, extend, or focus on a narrow
part of your argument. Joining the conversation may mean explaining how
your ideas differ from those presented by another author, or it may
involve synthesizing the ideas of multiple sources.

You can join the conversation in several ways without simply restating
the words of a source. One option is to combine arguments or research
findings from associated source ideas in order to create a summary claim
or statement. It may be that none of your sources individually point to
a result, but connecting some of them may lead you to a broad
conclusion. A second option builds on the first, but rather than
summarize to draw a conclusion, you would synthesize to make a claim
about the consequences or implications of the sources. A third option is
to identify and develop areas of agreement or disagreement between
sources and between your own claims and the sources you examine.
Finally, you may find areas for further study, including unanswered
questions raised by the research you analyze.

# Key Terms {#sect-00008}

These are key terms and characteristics of annotated bibliographies.

Agenda

: Underlying intentions or motivations of a person or group.

Analysis

: Detailed examination of a complex topic, often looking at individual
parts, to interpret meanings, themes, and author choices.

Annotations

: A note of explanation or comment. Annotations are both descriptive and
critical, adding clarity and insight beyond a straightforward summary.

bias

: Predisposition, inclination, or prejudice toward or against something.

Bibliography

. A list of sources and basic information about them, including author,
title, publisher, and publication date.

Boolean operators

: The words AND, OR, and NOT used as conjunctions between search terms
to combine or exclude keywords in an online database search. Boolean
operators help narrow searches.

Citation

: A set of information referencing a single source of information used
in a writer's research.

Format

: The way in which a composition is arranged or organized. In a
bibliography,

format

is the way in which the bibliographical information is presented.

Paraphrase

: A restatement, usually for clarity, of a written or spoken text.

Peer-reviewed source

: An article or other informational work written by an expert and
reviewed anonymously by other experts in the field to ensure the work's
overall quality, including its validity.

primary sources

: An immediate, firsthand account of a topic or an event from someone
connected to it. Original research, including interviews, experiments,
surveys, and field observations, is considered a primary source.

rigorous

: Exhaustive, thorough, accurate.

secondary sources

. A secondhand account of an event or topic, often providing analysis or
interpretation.

Style

: A set of rules for citing sources in academic writing.

Summary

: A brief statement covering the main ideas of an event or written
composition.

Synthesis

: The combination of ideas to form new conclusions.

tertiary sources

: A summary or digest of primary or secondary sources.

Thesis

:

A

statement that identifies a topic and the author's claim, or angle,
about that topic.
