m00134

008ce190-b427-498a-b844-88dfb7d39897

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain the purpose, language, culture, and expectations of different
genres of composition.

Analyze relationships between ideas and organizational patterns.

Evaluate research materials for credibility, sufficiency, accuracy,
timeliness, and bias.

# Introduction {#sect-00004}

In this section, you will read a sample annotated bibliography based on
the [Annotated Student Sample](#) to help you create your own annotated
bibliography. As you read, remember that annotations summarize, assess,
and evaluate a source, specifically regarding its function in the
project for which it is used. Note the purpose of the annotations in
this bibliography and how much information the author includes for
readers.

# Annotated Bibliography {#sect-00002}

Berners-Lee, M., et al. "Current Global Food Production Is Sufficient to
Meet Human Nutritional Needs in 2050 Provided There Is Radical Societal
Adaptation." *Elementa: Science of the Anthropocene*, vol. 6, 2018,
online.ucpress.edu/elementa/article/doi/10.1525/elementa.310/112838/Current-global-food-production-is-sufficient-to.
Accessed 7 Dec. 2020.

Format. *Notice that only the author's name is left-aligned. All other
text, including the annotation, is indented. The citation includes all
relevant information in MLA format.* Et al. *means "and others." M.
Berners-Lee is the principal author.*

M. Berners-Lee and the other authors of this article---C. Kennelly, R.
Watson, and C. N. Hewitt---all are associated with Lancaster \[UK\]
University. In this article, they present a quantitative analysis of
global and regional food supply, following the flow of calories,
protein, and selected micronutrients from production to human
consumption. Clear tables and figures accompany the text. A reference
list of 55 books, scholarly articles, and official reports provides
sources for additional information.

Of particular value is that the paper first analyzes current policies
and practices in food production, then offers projections for two
scenarios. One scenario assumes that current policies and practices
continue unchanged. The other explains what policies and practices need
to be implemented to supply a healthy diet globally in 2050. This
information makes it possible to describe what success looks like and
also what failure looks like.

Authority. *This annotation includes two paragraphs. In the first, Lily
Tran discusses the credibility of the authors, noting their research and
association with a British university. Tran also emphasizes the data
provided and comments on the breadth of references listed.*

Evaluation. *The second paragraph is an evaluation of the source's
applicability to the topic of the research paper. Notice that Tran
specifically explains its potential use: the scenarios given allow
readers to understand success and failure as related to healthy diets
from sustainable resources.*

Chai, Bingli Clark, et al. "Which Diet Has the Least Environmental
Impact on Our Planet? A Systematic Review of Vegan, Vegetarian and
Omnivorous Diets." *Sustainability*, vol. 11, no. 15, 2019,
www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/11/15/4110. Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Bingli Clark Chai and secondary authors Johannes Reidar van der Voort,
Kristina Grofelnik, Helga Gudny Eliasdottir, Ines Klöss, and Federico J.
A. Perez-Cueto are associated with the Design and Consumer Behaviour
Section, Department of Food Science, Faculty of Science, University of
Copenhagen, Denmark. They present a systematic review of the
environmental impacts of human diets, based on 16 published studies and
18 published reviews. Most of the studies were done in the United States
or Europe, and they ranged in duration from seven days to 27 years.
Separate tables compare the design, intervention, duration, diets,
quality assessment, and main outcomes of the studies, as well as the
diets, quality assessment, and main outcomes of the reviews. In addition
to the studies and reviews analyzed, the reference cites additional
journal articles for further information.

This is a secondary source in that it evaluates published work rather
than presenting original research. Its value lies in the compilation,
comparison, and summation of information from a variety of credible
sources.

Evaluation. *Tran summarizes the credibility of the source by noting the
authors' academic association and explaining that the source is actually
a compilation of study research.*

Reflection. *Tran notes the source's usefulness as a secondary source
whose authors compile, compare, and summarize research valuable to the
paper's argument. Notice, however, that she does not analyze the impact
of the source on her argument.*

Lusk, Jayson L., and F. Bailey Norwood. "Some Economic Benefits and
Costs of Vegetarianism." *Agricultural and Resource Economics Review*,
vol. 38, no. 2, 2009, pp. 109--124,
www.cambridge.org/core/journals/agricultural-and-resource-economics-review/article/abs/some-economic-benefits-and-costs-of-vegetarianism/1C2CB85022A54F27504A7DA65576C5C4.

Jayson L. Lusk is a distinguished professor and department head of the
Department of Agricultural Economics at Purdue University, and F. Bailey
Norwood is an associate professor in the Department of Agricultural
Economics at Oklahoma State University. They report the findings of a
detailed cost-benefit analysis examining production costs and nutrient
content of corn, soybeans, wheat, peanuts, hogs, cattle, chickens, and
milk to determine cost per nutrient produced at the farm level and the
retail level. The discussion includes the monetary value consumers place
on these foods, based on price and demand. The text is supplemented by
tables of data plus details of calculations.

Summary. *This annotation provides a robust summary of the article's
content.*

This approach is valuable because of its transparency as to methods and
the detailed calculations shown. Unfortunately, the numbers are dated;
the article was published in 2009. However, because of the specificity
of the presentation, it is possible to extrapolate trends that would be
applicable today.

Evaluation. *Tran points out a flaw in the data---namely, that it is
old. However, she explains how she might use it anyway through analysis.
Other than this short explanation of the potential to extrapolate
trends, Tran does not reflect on how she could use the source in other
ways.*

Schulz, Lee. "Would a Sudden Loss of the Meat and Dairy Industry, and
All the Ripple Effects, Destroy the Economy?" *Department of Economics*,
Iowa State U, www.econ.iastate.edu/node/691. Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Schulz is an associate professor in the Department of Economics at Iowa
State University. In response to a question about the effects of
removing livestock-related industries from the United States, he cites
statistics on the contributions these industries make to the economy,
both domestically and globally. No references are provided, but the
author's contact information is given for further questions.

Although this article is less scholarly than other sources cited here,
it is included to show a viewpoint that differs from the general
pro-vegetarian stance of most sources.

Evaluation and Reflection. *Noting that this source is less scholarly
and provides fewer citations than others, Tran nevertheless considers it
important for presenting a different viewpoint from the other sources
collected. Although she does not explicitly explain the impact of the
viewpoint on the argument, readers can assume she will address this
influence in her argument paper.*

Willett, Walter, et al. "Food in the Anthropocene: The EAT--*Lancet*
Commission on Healthy Diets from Sustainable Food Systems." *Lancet*,
vol. 393, no. 10170, 2019, pp. 447--492,
www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(18)31788-4/fulltext.

The EAT--*Lancet* Commission on Healthy Diets from Sustainable Food
Systems is composed of physicians and researchers from Germany, Sweden,
Norway, England, Switzerland, Lebanon, Mexico, Netherlands, Zimbabwe,
Australia, Indonesia, Italy, India, Pakistan, and the United States.
Lead author Walter Willett, MD, is affiliated with Harvard University's
T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Harvard Medical School, and the
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA. The commission report
quantitatively describes a universal healthy reference diet with the
goals of alleviating hunger and increasing nutrition, saving water,
minimizing agricultural land use, and reducing the effects of climate
change. This in-depth study cites 357 professional references available
for further information.

Summary. *In this annotation, Tran provides a summary listing the key
ideas.*

Authority and Evaluation. *Tran lists the lead author's credentials and
establishes the authority of the commission sponsoring the report,
showing the breadth of research involved.*

Directly related to the topic at hand, this is a major source because of
its global scope, thorough treatment, and realistic assessment of the
current situation and future challenges. This will be the most important
source for this paper.

Reflection. *Tran reflects on the quality of the source and explains its
impact on the research, revealing it to be the most important source for
the paper.*

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00003}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
