m00135

99d654f3-2c90-4ab5-9e4e-6b9d374acd8b

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Successfully apply citation conventions to your writing, understanding
the ideas of intellectual property that motivate their use.

Evaluate research materials for credibility, sufficiency, accuracy,
timeliness, and bias.

Compose to discover and reconsider ideas.

Compose an annotated bibliography that uses correct style conventions
and integrates the writer's ideas with ideas from related sources.

Now it is time to try your hand at creating your own annotated
bibliography. As you work through identifying and writing about your
sources, you may want to seek out additional ones to help support your
argument or thesis. This recursive process is similar to the fine-tuning
that occurs during the writing process, in which a writer moves fluidly
among drafting, editing, and revising. You can return to your annotated
bibliography during the course of research and writing to modify,
further develop, analyze, and add to your sources. Remember, using a
variety of sources can broaden your perspective about your topic by
showing how different scholars and popular publications approach it.

# Summary of Assignment: Annotated Bibliography {#sect-00002}

For this assignment, you will create an annotated bibliography based on
your research for one of the writing assignments in this course,
preferably [Writing Process: Integrating Research](#). After collecting
and choosing sources, you will write citations using [MLA Documentation
and Format](#) and compose a one- or two-paragraph annotation for each
source. Remember, the purpose of the annotation is to provide

a brief summary that allows readers to understand the background of the
source and its basic claims; and

an evaluation and reflection on the source's reliability, its
usefulness, and the author's or organization's credibility.

While the format for your MLA citation should follow the prescriptive
pattern from the Handbook, you will decide on the language and structure
of the annotations you include. While your topic, personal style, and
ideas may lend themselves to a more standardized format, it is possible
that they may instead challenge codified conventions in favor of a style
more authentic to you.

Another Lens 1. Consider alternatives to a formal annotated bibliography
that complements differing learning styles or abilities. If your
instructor is amenable, you may informally annotate sources in their
margins or use an online annotation program such as [Kami](#).

Another Lens 2. Another alternative is to discuss, with a partner or in
a small group, each source's credentials, key ideas, and usefulness to
your project. In either case, using a graphic organizer similar to the
one in the next section should help you organize your ideas.

# Organizing Information {#sect-00003}

Begin by collecting sources. A good way to start is to make a list of
keywords, known authors, organizations, and previously identified
sources related to your topic. For example, imagine you have been
assigned an argument project and chosen artificial intelligence as the
topic. Begin, then, with the keywords *artificial intelligence*. A
Google search will reveal a wealth of information on the topic, likely
too much to help you craft a meaningful argument. However, a basic
search will allow you to

effectively define

artificial intelligence

as "the simulation of human intelligence by machines programmed to mimic
human thought and actions";

name four types of artificial intelligence: reactive machines, limited
memory, theory of mind, and self-aware;

identify leading industries in which artificial intelligence is already
present, such as self-driving cars and virtual butlers; and

recognize the existence of a spectrum of thought surrounding the ethics
and governance of artificial intelligence.

You also may discover some alternative search terms to use, such as
*machine learning*, *data mining*, *robotics*, and *neuroscience*.
Although you may not ultimately use them in your argument, the sources
that you find may point you toward a focused thesis.

When you finish your keyword search, the next step is to search academic
databases. Use your library's resources to find scholarly sources such
as journal articles, books, textbooks, expert interviews, and reputable
periodical pieces. Aim for five to seven sources to begin with, though
you likely will add more as you work on your project. You may already
have an idea of what claims you want to make in your argument, but the
sources may shape them as well. As you review the sources you collect,
choose those that give you a varied range of perspectives on the topic.
Remember that you can return to this procedure at various points in your
research, adding sources as your needs change and as you refine your
claims. While you search for sources, keep in mind the specifics of your
research project, and limit your search to sources that specifically
support your argument, inform a counterargument, or otherwise add
information that enhances your research.

# Thesis {#sect-00004}

Before you choose sources, you must have an idea of what you want to
say. If you're creating an annotated bibliography for the argument
described [Writing Process: Integrating Research](#), you likely have
already drafted a thesis statement. If you are creating an annotated
bibliography for another topic, you will need to draft a working thesis.
Your thesis will state your position on the topic. It is often a single
clear, concise sentence that reveals your side in the argument. You will
use your sources to support the thesis you draft.

These frames may be useful when you draft your working thesis:

Because \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, \[someone\] should \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ saves \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, reduces \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, and
helps \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The lack of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ shows \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ influences \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and, by extension,
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ accurately (inaccurately) portrays \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
because \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ is a result of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, and
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

Although some argue that \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, a close examination shows
that \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ prove that \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

# Citations and Annotations {#sect-00005}

For each source you choose, first write the source citation in MLA
format. An example of a citation for the research project on artificial
intelligence might be:

Buiten, Miriam C. "Towards Intelligent Regulation of Artificial
Intelligence." *European Journal of Risk Regulation*, vol. 10, no. 1,
2019, pp. 41--59,
www.cambridge.org/core/journals/european-journal-of-risk-regulation/article/towards-intelligent-regulation-of-artificial-intelligence/AF1AD1940B70DB88D2B24202EE933F1B.
Accessed 23 Jan. 2021.

After preparing citations for each of your sources, write the
annotations. To do this, consider the following:

The purpose of the work

For whom the work is written

How to summarize the content

The author/organization producing the work

Distinctive or interesting features of the content (particularly in
comparison with other sources)

The relevance of the work to your topic

Strengths, weaknesses, and bias present

Conclusions and implications

To annotate, you will typically begin with a summary of one to three
sentences. For longer or more complex sources, the summary may be
longer. Then discuss unique features of the content, an evaluation of
the source, and a reflection on how the source is useful to your
research. For each source, use a graphic organizer such as [\#](#). It
will help you collect the needed information, organize your thoughts,
and get started summarizing and analyzing your sources.

  ----------------------- -----------------------------------------------
  *Source Citation*       

  *Intended Audience*     

  *Main Ideas, Arguments, 
  and Themes Present*     

  *Author's Point of      
  View, Bias, and         
  Expertise*              

  *Comparison with Other  
  Sources on the Topic*   

  *Evaluation of Source's 
  Relevance to Topic*     

  *Evaluation of          
  Strengths and           
  Weaknesses*             

  *Conclusions Drawn by   
  Author*                 
  ----------------------- -----------------------------------------------

  : Source evaluation organizer {#table-00002}

#  {#sect-00006}

Creating an annotated bibliography requires you to read your sources
critically. As you first collect your sources, briefly review and
examine the information they contain, specifically through the lens of
how each can add to your research. As you read more critically, choose
those that represent different perspectives on your topic as well as
those that have similar viewpoints but arrive at them in different ways
or from various angles.

If you have been using a graphic organizer for each source, as
suggested, the information you need and your ideas about the source will
be right there for you. If you haven't organized your research in this
way, now is a good time to do it, when you do not yet need to structure
good paragraphs. When it is time for you to write your annotations,
having your thoughts already mapped out will make your work easier. For
the hypothetical artificial intelligence project, you might organize
information for the article cited earlier as shown in [\#](#).

  ----------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  *Source Citation*       Buiten, Miriam C. "Towards Intelligent Regulation of Artificial Intelligence." *European Journal of Risk Regulation*, vol. 10, no. 1, 2019, pp. 41--59,
                          www.cambridge.org/core/journals/european-journal-of-risk-regulation/article/towards-intelligent-regulation-of-artificial-intelligence/AF1AD1940B70DB88D2B24202EE933F1B.
                          Accessed 23 Jan. 2021.

  *Intended Audience*     The journal is published by Cambridge University Press. Therefore, it is peer reviewed and intended for an academic audience.

  *Main Ideas, Arguments, Discusses the unpredictability and difficulty of controlling artificial intelligence and examines what, if anything, can be done to increase transparency, specifically
  and Themes Present*     as it relates to biases of algorithms

  *Author's Point of      Buiten is a law and economics professor at the University of Mannheim. She is the author or coauthor of nine publications, and contributed to others, about law and
  View, Bias, and         technology and digitalization, competition law, and European law.
  Expertise*              

  *Comparison with Other  Other sources call for total transparency in legal matters regarding artificial intelligence. This article questions whether such transparency is useful and/or feasible
  Sources on the Topic*   on the basis of current laws

  *Evaluation of Source's Focuses on legal transparency for artificial intelligence, related to the question of whether artificial intelligence is harmful or helpful to society
  Relevance to Topic*     

  *Evaluation of          Well-researched; uses dozens of peer-reviewed sources
  Strengths and           
  Weaknesses*             

  *Conclusions Drawn by   Transparency for artificial intelligence will be difficult and expensive to comply with and should be better defined in legal contexts before it is required.
  Author*                 
  ----------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Completed source evaluation organizer {#table-00003}

For some sources, you may be unable to find information for each
category. In particular, for sources that are very short or from which
you use only one or two bits of information, your annotations will not
be long or complex, and your graphic organizer may seem sparse. That is
to be expected. What is important at this stage is to identify how you
will use your resources as they relate to your argument or thesis.

After you have outlined your sources by using the graphic organizer or a
similar method, it is time to start writing the actual annotations.
Remember the three tasks in writing an annotation:

Summary

the central idea or scope of the source, particularly as it relates to
your research project.

Evaluation

the source for authority, author's perspective, reliability, validity,
and bias.

Reflect

on how the source affects your research and your thinking.

Your annotated bibliography should include at least some of these
functions and, depending on the source, may contain all of them. Below
is an example of an annotated bibliography entry for the article on
artificial intelligence. The entry begins with the correctly formatted
citation, followed by two paragraphs summarizing, evaluating, and
reflecting. Because you already have completed the graphic organizer,
much of the analysis is already done there. Simply take that thinking
and shape it into useful paragraphs, like those the writer created here.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

You can break down this sample annotation, analyzing each part
separately as shown in [\#](#).

Buiten, Miriam C. "Towards Intelligent Regulation of Artificial
Intelligence." *European Journal of Risk Regulation*, vol. 10, no. 1,
2019, pp. 41--59,
www.cambridge.org/core/journals/european-journal-of-risk-regulation/article/towards-intelligent-regulation-of-artificial-intelligence/AF1AD1940B70DB88D2B24202EE933F1B.
Accessed 23 Jan. 2021.

Format. *Notice the MLA format, including information listing the
author, title, publishing journal, and DOI or link to the article. The
reader will be able to find and read the article easily.*

Authority: Miriam Buiten is a law and economics professor. She has
authored or coauthored eight journal articles and one book, covering
topics such as law, technology, and digitalization; competition law; and
European law. This article appears in a journal published by Cambridge
University Press. It is peer reviewed and intended for an academic
audience. The author discusses the unpredictability and difficulty of
controlling artificial intelligence and examines what, if anything, can
be done to increase transparency, specifically as it relates to the
biases present in artificial intelligence algorithms.

Authority. *The author is named and introduced with background
information establishing her authority in the field. The publishing
organization is also named, establishing credibility as a peer-reviewed
journal.*

Summary. *The contents of the text are summarized briefly, allowing
readers to quickly understand the topic and scope of the article and to
begin to piece together its relevance to the overall research project.*

This source focuses on legal transparency for artificial intelligence,
which is related to the question of whether artificial intelligence is
harmful or helpful to society. The author argues that transparency for
artificial intelligence will be difficult and expensive to comply with
and should be better defined in legal contexts before it is required.
Many other sources call for total transparency in legal matters
regarding artificial intelligence. However, this article questions
whether such transparency is useful and/or feasible based on current
laws. The article is well researched, using dozens of peer-reviewed
sources.

Evaluation. *This paragraph includes an evaluative statement that shows
the article's validity.*

This article aids the researcher in shaping her argument that oversight
of artificial intelligence is a highly complex endeavor that, although
important, will be difficult to achieve. It is useful to the argument
that laws need to develop at a much quicker pace to keep up with rapidly
developing technology.

Reflection. *This part of the paragraph reveals how the source fits into
the research puzzle, noting that it indirectly supports the claim that
developing oversight for artificial intelligence is not a simple task
and would require the law to evolve quickly.*

Style. *The annotation is written in third person, referring to "the
researcher" and "her," as opposed to using first-person pronouns such
as* me *and* I.

# Formatting {#sect-00007}

The format of an annotated bibliography can vary depending on the
discipline and purpose. Therefore, be clear at the outset which style
you need to use. In academic writing, that information often will come
from your instructor. Generally, annotated bibliographies will be
written in [MLA Documentation and Format](#), [APA Documentation and
Format](#), or Chicago style.

This text uses MLA style. MLA source citations follow several principles
in place of specific rules. The style has been adapted in recent years
to respond to the evolving nature of text in an increasingly digital
world. Thus, the *MLA Handbook* is organized by the *process* of
citation, rather than listing rules for every type of source. However,
certain overall guidelines apply. When you cite a source, first identify
core elements that are present. Remember from earlier in this chapter
that these are author(s), title of source, title of container, version,
number, publisher, publication date, and location.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

**Author.* The entry with gold highlighting begins with the author's
last name, followed by a comma and the remainder of the name. The
author's name is followed by a period.*

**Title of Source.* The title of the source follows the author's name in
purple highlighting. The title is either italicized or placed within
quotation marks, depending on the type of source, and followed by a
period. Book titles are italicized, while print or online articles are
placed in quotation marks, as shown.*

**Title of Container.* The container, highlighted in teal, is the larger
work to which a source belongs. An article may belong to a website or
journal, a song to an album, or a video to a video-sharing site. This
container comes next in the citation. It is generally italicized and
followed by a comma. However, some sources do not have containers; for
example, a book (versus a chapter in a book) or an entire website
(versus a single page on a website) is self-contained and thus has no
container to cite.*

**Version.* Next, the version is listed, if there is one. For example, a
textbook edition or version of a text would appear here, followed by a
comma. This citation example doesn't have a version, so that information
is skipped.*

**Number.* Some sources, especially academic journals, are part of a
numbered sequence as shown in green highlighting. Journals usually have
both volume and issue numbers; include both in your citation, separated
by commas.*

**Publisher.* The next element in the citation is the publisher,
followed by a comma. The publisher does not have to be listed for some
sources, including periodicals, works published by the author or editor,
websites with the same name as the publisher, or websites that host
works but do not actually publish them. Because this sample source is a
periodical, no publisher is listed in the citation.*

**Publication Date.* List the most recent date of publication available
for the version of the source you used. The date is followed by a comma
as shown in red highlighting.*

**Location.* Location, shown in dark and light gray highlighting, refers
to where in the source you found the information, including page numbers
and URLs. Be as specific as possible, as this information allows readers
to return to your source to read it for themselves. When listing a URL,
remove the beginning tag of http:// or https://.*

## Optional elements {#sect-00008}

You may want to add optional elements to help readers identify the
source more easily. These can include the following:

City of publication, generally only for books that were published before
1900 or whose publishers either have offices in more than one country or
are unknown in North America (MLA 8)

Access date, which is present in the sample annotation

DOI (digital object identifier), which may be used in place of a URL if
available

Original publication date, if it differs from the publication date used
for the citation

## Alphabetizing and Indenting {#sect-00009}

Other rules also apply to MLA citations in a research project. Most of
these are formatting and style rules that add to a polished final
product. Remember to list sources in alphabetical order according to the
author's last name. If the source has more than one author, list it
according to the last name of the first author mentioned. If the source
has no author named, insert it into your alphabetical list according to
the first word in the title. For example, if Miriam C. Buiten's name
were not mentioned, you would enter the item under *T*, the first letter
of the first word in the title, *Towards*. In your bibliography,
double-space the citation, and do not leave a space between entries.

In an annotated bibliography, indent the entire annotation in the same
manner as the source citation after the first line. In most word
processing programs, you can create this formatting by highlighting the
citation and annotation paragraphs and then creating a hanging indent.
In Microsoft Word, open the Paragraph Settings icon on the Home tab.
Under the tab that reads Indents and Spacing, find the section labeled
Indentation. On the right side of that section is the label Special.
Click the drop-down menu, and choose Hanging. Different word processing
programs may require you to create hanging indentations in another way.
Consult an MLA guide often to ensure that your citations are correct.

## Annotations {#sect-00010}

Annotations are the most important part of an annotated bibliography.
Although there is no set format for writing annotations, remember to
write them in paragraph form and to summarize, evaluate, and/or reflect.
Annotation lengths will vary depending on the length of the source, how
it is used in your project, and how much analysis you do within the
annotation. However, a general length of one to two paragraphs
consisting of 100 to 200 words is roughly the standard.

# Descriptive/Informative and Analytical/Critical Annotations {#sect-00011}

There are two major types of annotated bibliographies. The first is
descriptive annotations, or informative, summarizing the material and
explaining why the source is useful for your topic. This type of
annotated bibliography also points out special features of the text,
including any data, graphics, or other characteristics. Although you
discuss the author's main arguments and conclusions, you do not analyze
or evaluate them. Descriptive annotations are useful for helping readers
understand an author's main ideas but less helpful for showing how the
source has influenced the research project as a whole.

The other type of annotated bibliography is analytical bibliography, or
critical. This type includes all the features of a descriptive annotated
bibliography, including a summary of the material. In addition, it
includes your analysis of the information in each source and explanation
of how the source has influenced the development of your research. With
analytical or critical annotations, you examine the strengths,
weaknesses, and biases present in the author's information and explain
how the author's work and conclusions apply to your research.

In projects for this course, especially those using arguments, you will
almost always create analytical or critical annotated bibliographies,
though the detail in which you analyze may vary from source to source.
The detail in these bibliographies will contribute to your knowledge
base and provide information for others.

# Further Reading {#sect-00012}

To learn more about creating an annotated bibliography, consider the
following sources:

"Annotated Bibliographies." *OWL: The Purdue Online Writing Lab*, Purdue
U,
owl.purdue.edu/owl/general_writing/common_writing_assignments/annotated_bibliographies/index.html.

Beatty, Luke, and Cynthia A. Cochran. *Writing the Annotated
Bibliography: A Guide for Students and Researchers*. Routledge, 2020.

"How to Prepare an Annotated Bibliography: The Annotated Bibliography."
*Cornell University Library*, Cornell U, 5 May 2021,
guides.library.cornell.edu/annotatedbibliography.

# Works Cited {#sect-00013}

Krause, Steven D. *The Process of Research Writing*. 2007,
www.stevendkrause.com/tprw/.

"MLA Citation Guide (8th Edition): Annotated Bibliography." *LibGuides
at Columbia College (BC)*, LibGuides, 16 June 2021,
columbiacollege-ca.libguides.com/mla/annot_bib.

"MLA Formatting and Style Guide." *OWL: The Purdue Online Writing Lab*,
Purdue U, 2021,
owl.purdue.edu/owl/research_and_citation/mla_style/mla_formatting_and_style_guide/mla_general_format.html.
