m00125

f1793fb8-57b5-4584-a80c-b1c477e5a21f

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Locate and evaluate primary and secondary research materials, including
journal articles and essays, books, scholarly and professionally
established and maintained databases or archives, and informal
electronic networks and Internet sources.

Apply methods and technologies commonly used for research in various
fields.

Once you have chosen your argumentative research topic, developed a
workable research question, and devised a plan for your research as
described in [Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with
Evidence](#), you are ready to begin the task usually associated with
the term *research*---namely, the collection of sources. One key point
to remember at this stage is intentionality; that is, begin with a
research plan rather than a collection of everything you find related to
your topic. Without a plan, you easily may end up overwhelmed by too
many unusable sources. A carefully considered research plan will save
you time and energy and help make your search for sources more
productive. Access to information is generally not a problem; the
problem is knowing where to find the information you need and how to
distinguish among types and qualities of sources. In short, finding
sources is all about sorting, selecting, and evaluating.

Your specific methods for collecting sources will depend on the details
of your research project. However, a good strategy to begin with is to
think in terms of needs: *What do you need, as the researcher and
writer? What do your readers need?* This kind of needs assessment is
similar to the considerations you make about the rhetorical situation
when writing an analysis or argument.

Review [\#](#) as you conduct a source "needs assessment."

+------------------+--------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Your Needs*     | Basic Facts/Data/Information   | These materials help    |
|                  |                                | inform you about your   |
|                  |                                | topic. They also may    |
|                  |                                | help shape the scope of |
|                  |                                | your knowledge of your  |
|                  |                                | topic.                  |
|                  +--------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                  | Critical/Conceptual/Contextual | These materials provide |
|                  | Sources                        | explanations and        |
|                  |                                | context for your        |
|                  |                                | research project. They  |
|                  |                                | may range from basic    |
|                  |                                | historical or           |
|                  |                                | contextual information  |
|                  |                                | to explanations of      |
|                  |                                | special theories or     |
|                  |                                | ideologies. These       |
|                  |                                | materials will help you |
|                  |                                | with your analysis and  |
|                  |                                | will help you address   |
|                  |                                | the *So what?*          |
|                  |                                | questions that your     |
|                  |                                | research topic may      |
|                  |                                | pose.                   |
+------------------+--------------------------------+-------------------------+
| *Readers' Needs* | Reason to Invest               | This material engages   |
|                  |                                | readers both            |
|                  |                                | intellectually and      |
|                  |                                | emotionally.            |
|                  +--------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                  | Proof That It Matters          | These are convincing    |
|                  |                                | arguments or            |
|                  |                                | illustrative examples   |
|                  |                                | that answer the *So     |
|                  |                                | what?* question,        |
|                  |                                | showing why anyone      |
|                  |                                | should care about the   |
|                  |                                | topic or your approach  |
|                  |                                | to it.                  |
|                  +--------------------------------+-------------------------+
|                  | Examples and Explanation       | These are illustrative  |
|                  |                                | examples and            |
|                  |                                | explanations of         |
|                  |                                | complex, esoteric, or   |
|                  |                                | idiosyncratic concepts, |
|                  |                                | theories, technical     |
|                  |                                | processes, etc.         |
+------------------+--------------------------------+-------------------------+

: Research needs assessment {#table-00001}

# Generating Key Words {#sect-00002}

Before you begin locating sources, consider the research terms you will
use to find these sources. Most research is categorized according to key
terms that are important for understanding the topic and/or
methodologies. When beginning the research process, you may find that
the ideas or words associated with your topic are not yielding results
when you search library or Internet databases (organized collections of
information).

If you are running into challenges locating information related to your
topic, you may not have chosen the specific key terms needed. Because
libraries and online databases generate search results based on
algorithms that target keywords, the best way to find the appropriate
terminology associated with your topic is to practice generating key
terms. You may need a range of keywords, some for library searches and
others for online searches. When considering the difference between
keyword searches in academic libraries versus online sources, note that
most academic libraries use Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH)
for subject searches of their online catalogs. Many databases use
subject searches based on algorithms that may be unique to that
database. Don't become discouraged if you find that the terms for
searching in your academic library may be somewhat different from the
terms for searching online. As you begin to find sources related to your
subject, take notes on the variety of terms that describe your research
area. These notes will come in handy as both keyword and subject
searches throughout your research process.

The following steps and examples will help you get started:

Begin by limiting your topic to one or two sentences or questions. (

What effects do a region's water and temperatures have on fall foliage?

)

Highlight specific words that are key to understanding or finding
answers to your question. (

What effects do the amount of water a region gets and temperatures for
that region have on colors of fall foliage?

)

Consider words assumed but not mentioned in your question. For instance,
the example question implies a search around trees and rainfall;
however,

trees

and

rainfall

are not mentioned. Add these words to the words highlighted in your
question.

Consider synonyms for the words you highlighted. A search for synonyms
for

fall

yields

harvest

,

autumn

, and

autumnal equinox

. A search for synonyms for

leaves

yields

foliage

,

fronds

, and

stalks

. Be sure you understand the meaning of each synonym so that you can
choose those that best capture the concepts you seek to research.

Try different combinations of the key terms and synonyms to help you
find as many sources as you can.

You can find more information about key terms and searches by consulting
[Writing Process: Informing and Analyzing](#).

# Locating Sources {#sect-00003}

Once you have identified sources to fit both your and your readers'
needs, you can begin to locate these sources. Throughout the research
process, look for sources that will provide enough information for you
to form your own opinions or answer your research question(s). Use
source materials as support for your own words and ideas. The following
are possible locations for source materials:

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Libraries {#sect-00004}

While much of your writing and research work happens online, libraries
remain indispensable to research. Your university's physical and/or
online library is a valuable resource, providing access to databases,
books and periodicals (both print and electronic), and other media that
might not otherwise be accessible. In many cases, experienced people are
available with discipline-specific research advice. To take full
advantage of library resources, keep the following suggestions in mind:

Visit early and often.

As soon as you receive a research assignment, visit the library
(physically, virtually, or both) to discover resources available for
your project. Even if your initial research indicates a wealth of
material, you may be unable to find everything during your first search.
You may find that a book has been checked out or that your library
doesn't subscribe to a certain periodical. Furthermore, going to the
library can be extremely helpful because you likely will see a range of
additional sources simply by looking around the areas in which you
locate initial sources.

Check general sources first.

Look at dictionaries, encyclopedias, atlases, and yearbooks for
background information about your topic. An hour spent with these
sources will give you a quick overview of the scope of your topic and
lead you to more specific information.

Talk to librarians.

At first, you might show a librarian your assignment and explain your
topic and research plans. Later, you might ask for help in finding a
particular source or finding out whether the library has additional
sources you have not checked yet. Librarians are professional
information experts; don't hesitate to use their expertise.

## General Reference Works {#sect-00005}

General reference works provide background information and basic facts
about a topic. To locate these sources, you will need a variety of
tools, including the online catalog and databases, as well as periodical
indexes. To use these resources effectively, follow this four-step
process:

Consult general reference works to gain background information and basic
facts.

Consult specialized reference works to find relevant articles on all
topics.

Consult the library's online catalog to identify library books on your
topic.

Consult other sources as needed.

The summaries, overviews, and definitions in general reference works can
help you decide whether to pursue a topic further and where to turn next
for information. Because the information in these sources is necessarily
general, they will not be sufficient alone as the basis for most
research projects and are not strong sources to cite in research papers.

Following are some of the most useful general reference works to provide
context and background information for research projects:

Almanacs

and

yearbooks

provide up-to-date information, including statistics on politics,
agriculture, economics, and population. See especially the

Facts on File World News Digest

(1940--present), an index to current events reprinted in newspapers
worldwide, and the

World Almanac and Book of Facts

(1868--present), which reviews important events of the past year as well
as data on a wide variety of topics, including sports, government,
science, business, and education. In addition to current publications,
almanacs from recent years or from many years ago provide information
about the times in which they were written.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Atlases

such as the

Hammond World Atlas

, the

National Geographic Atlas of the World

, and the

Times Atlas of the World

can help you identify places anywhere in the world and provide
information on population, climate, and industry.

Biographical dictionaries

contain information about people who have made some mark on history in
many different fields. Consult the following:

Contemporary Authors

(I962--present), containing short biographies of authors who have
published during the year;

Current Biography

(1940--present), containing articles and photographs of people in the
news; and

Who's Who in America

(1899--present), the standard biographical reference for living
Americans.

Dictionaries

contain definitions and histories of words, along with their
syllabication, and correct spelling and usage.

Encyclopedias

provide basic information, explanations, and definitions of virtually
every topic, concept, country, institution, historical person or
movement, and cultural artifact imaginable. One-volume works such as the

Random House Encyclopedia

and the

Columbia Encyclopedia

give brief overviews. Larger works, such as the

New Encyclopædia Britannica

(32 volumes, also online), contain more detailed information.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

## Databases {#sect-00006}

Databases, usually accessed directly through your library website, are
indispensable tools for finding both journal and general-audience
articles. Some databases contain general-interest information, indexing
articles from newspapers, magazines, and sometimes scholarly journals as
well. While these databases can be useful when you begin your research,
once you have focused your research topic, you likely will need to use
subject databases, which index articles primarily from specialized
scholarly and technical journals.

The difference between scholarly journal and other articles is
important. Although at times these lines are blurred, think of articles
found in popular journals or magazines as published widely and usually
addressing a general audience. Such materials are useful for obtaining
introductory or background information on a topic as well as a sense of
the range of factors to consider. Indeed, these sources may help you
narrow your topic by giving you a basic understanding of the range and
scope of the "conversation" you are entering in your research process.
Scholarly journal articles, on the other hand, typically are written and
published by academic researchers. These publications often have more
specialized information and vocabulary and are most useful after you
have narrowed your topic and developed specific research questions.
Within the range of scholarly articles are those that are peer reviewed
or found in peer-reviewed journals. These journal articles are generally
more specific and contain more reliable information because they are
written by experts and reviewed by other experts in the field before the
article is published. See [Compiling Sources for an Annotated
Bibliography](#) for more information about peer-reviewed publications.

A good starting point for research is a general-interest database, which
covers a wide range of topics from many sources. Several major
general-interest databases are listed below; however, many others may be
available at your library. A librarian likely can help you find those
that may be specific to your university.

Academic OneFile from Gale

. Based on the access capabilities of your institution, you may be able
to use this database, which indexes citations, abstracts, and some full
texts in such subjects as the physical sciences, technology, medicine,
social sciences, the arts, theology, literature, and more. By using this
database, you may be able to retrieve the full text of articles provided
in PDF and HTML formats and audio versions of texts in MP3 format.

Academic Search Complete

from EBSCOhost. Your library also may provide you with access to this
database, which indexes citations, abstracts, and full text from journal
articles, books, reports, and conference proceedings in all disciplines.
An advantage of this database is that you can retrieve full-text
articles provided in PDF and HTML forms.

Academic Search Complete

also provides searchable cited references for nearly 1,000 journals.

CQ Researcher

. This general database is unique because it publishes well-researched,
single-themed 12,000-word reports by respected journalists who have
established ethos because of their history of in-depth, unbiased
coverage of health, social trends, criminal justice, international
affairs, education, the environment, technology, and the economy. These
reports can be beneficial at any research stage because they provide an
overview, background, chronology, assessment of the current situation,
tables and maps, pro/con statements from opposing positions, and
bibliographies. Files from before 1996 are in HTML format; newer ones,
beginning January 1996, are PDFs.

Factiva

. Many students find Factiva a useful general tool because it provides
full-text news articles and business/industry information from
newswires, newspapers, business and industry magazines, television and
radio transcripts, financial reports, and news service photos. Within
the Factiva database, most content is HTML, though other formats are
available for export. The database contains news sources from 1979 to
the present and financial data from the 1960s to the present.

Google

. One of the most frequently used databases for any research is Google.
Students often use Google to begin their searches because they can find
material from many different sources, both formal and informal,
including blogs, journals, websites, and popular magazines. For academic
research, you may find it useful to begin with a general Google search
and then move to

Google Scholar

. Google Scholar provides a simple way to do a broad search for
scholarly literature across a variety of disciplines and
sources---articles, theses, books, et cetera. Within the Google
database, you will also find more information or effective uses of
Google for your research purposes. See

Compiling Sources for an Annotated Bibliography

for more information about Google Scholar.

Opposing Viewpoints in Context from Gale

. As you familiarize yourself with your topic, you may find this
database helpful for understanding the parameters of the discussion on
your topic. Opposing Viewpoints offers over 20,000 pro/con viewpoint
essays on controversial issues and current events, plus thousands of
topic overviews, primary source documents, social activist biographies,
court case overviews, related full-text periodical articles, statistical
tables, and multimedia content.

Gale in Context

. This database provides curated topic pages that combine academic
journal articles, primary sources, reference works, essays, news
sources, multimedia, and biographies about people, events, places, and
time periods.

Web of Science from Clarivate Analytics

. The three Web of Science databases index citations from journal
articles and conference proceedings in the sciences, social sciences,
arts, and humanities. You can access cited reference searches, analyze
trends and patterns, and create visual representations of citation
relationships. Its contents date from 1900 to the present.

## Government Documents {#sect-00007}

The U.S. government publishes numerous reports, pamphlets, catalogs, and
newsletters on most issues of national concern. To access documents from
published in 1976 and onward, consult the Catalog of U.S. Government
Publications. To find documents published prior to 1976, consult the
*Monthly Catalog of United States*. Both resources should be available
electronically and contain listings for materials in formats such as
nonprint media, records, CDs, audiocassettes, videotapes, slides,
photographs, and other media. Many of these publications may be located
through your university's library catalog as well. Consult a librarian
to find out what government documents are available to you and in what
forms.

## Archives/Special Collections {#sect-00008}

Many libraries have donated records, papers, or writings that make up
archives or special collections containing manuscripts, rare books,
architectural drawings, historical photographs and maps, and so on.
These, as well as items of local interest such as community and family
histories, artifacts, and other memorabilia, are usually found in a
special room or section of the library. By consulting these collections
or archives, you also may find local or regional atlases, maps, and
geographic information systems (GIS). Maps and atlases depict more than
roads and boundaries. They include information on population density,
language patterns, soil types, and much more. And, as discussed later in
this chapter, these materials can figure into research projects as
primary data.

University libraries' special collections often house items donated by
alumni, families, and other community groups. For example, one state
university library's special collections, housing a collection of Black
Panther and American Communist Party newspapers and pamphlets,
celebrated Black History Month with an exhibit featuring the Black
Panther Party and the Black Power movement. Included in the exhibit were
Black Panther newspapers and pamphlets published in the 1960s and 1970s,
as well as earlier civil rights literature from the American Communist
Party. This exhibit not only helped students become aware of information
about the time and movement but also demonstrated the range and depth of
the university's archive collection.

## Interlibrary Loans {#sect-00009}

Even though libraries house many materials, you may need a source
unavailable at your library. If so, you usually can get the source
through a networked system called interlibrary loans. Your library will
borrow the source for you and provide some guidance as to the form of
the materials and how long you will have access to them.

Whichever search tool you use, nothing is magic about information
gathered. You will need to use critical skills to evaluate materials
gathered from sources, and you will still need to ask these basic
questions: Is the author identified? ls that person a professional in
the field or an interested amateur? What are their biases likely to be?
Does the document represent an individual's opinion or peer-reviewed
research?

# Evaluating Sources {#sect-00010}

One key to judging the validity of sources is analysis. You already may
be familiar with analysis, which involves looking at texts, media, or
other artifacts to examine their individual parts and make interpretive
claims about them. In the research process, analysis involves collecting
data, deciding how you want to use that data *(what are you looking
for?),* and applying those criteria to your data. For example, if you
were looking at how the presence of social media has changed in
television programs in the last five to seven years, you would determine
what shows you want to view and what patterns you want to study.

As you analyze sources, you evaluate them in terms of your research
needs. On the basis of your needs assessment, you will determine whether
a source is acceptable or unacceptable, good or bad, trustworthy or
biased. Although firm categories can be useful, you may find a more
nuanced evaluation helpful as well. When you look for sources and
evaluate them, begin with general questions such as these:

How do I want to use this source?

Am I able to use it in that way?

Might this source be more valuable if used in another way?

When you ask whether a source is acceptable, the answer usually depends
on what you want to do with it. Even biased, false, or misleading
material can be useful, depending on how a researcher puts it to use.
For instance, you may be writing about a particular historical event and
come across a magazine article featuring a biased account of that event.
If your purpose is to write a brief but accurate description of the
event, then this account is of little use. *But what if your purpose is
to write a critical analysis of the ways in which misleading media
coverage of an event has influenced public perception of it?* Suddenly,
the biased account becomes useful as a specific example of the media
coverage you wish to analyze.

A source's value, therefore, is a function of your purpose for it.
Labeling a source as good or bad, truthful or misleading, doesn't really
evaluate its use to you as a researcher and writer; truthful sources can
be used poorly, and misleading sources can be used effectively. What
matters is whether the source fits your purpose.

Finally, when evaluating a source, consider time (*when was it judged
true?*) and perspective (*who said it was true, and for what reason?*).

## Locate the Date {#sect-00011}

Most documents, especially those created since the advent of copyright
laws at the end of the 19th century, include their date of publication.
Pay attention to the date a source was created, and reflect on what
might have happened since then. Information may be outdated and useless.
On the other hand, it may still be highly useful---and continuing
usefulness is the reason many old texts remain in circulation. Once you
locate the source's date, you can decide whether it will be relevant for
your purpose. If you are studying change over time, for example, old
statistical information would be useful baseline data to demonstrate
what has changed. But if you are studying current culture, dated
information may be misleading. In other words, when evaluating whether a
dated source serves your purpose, know what that purpose is.

## Identify Perspective {#sect-00012}

To identify and evaluate perspective, ask what viewpoint, or
perspective, it represents. *Who created the source, and for what
purpose?* This question can be difficult to answer immediately because
an author's viewpoint is not always identified or summarized in the
source itself---and when it is, the information provided, being a
creation of the author, cannot always be believed. To trust a source,
you need to analyze its assumptions, evidence, biases, and reasoning,
which together constitute the author's perspective. ln essence, you need
to ask these questions: *What is this writer's purpose? Is it scholarly
analysis, political advocacy, entertainment, or something else?*
Consider the following:

Will a quick perusal of the introduction or first chapter reveal the
writer's assumptions about the subject or audience?

Can you tell which statements are facts, which are inferences drawn from
facts, and which are strictly opinions?

Does a first reading of the evidence persuade you? Is the logic of the
position apparent and/or credible?

Does the writer omit relevant points?

Do the answers to these questions make you more or less willing to
accept the author's conclusions?

Although trying to answer these questions about every source may seem
daunting or even futile at first, have patience and give the research
process the time it needs. At the beginning of a research project, when
you are still trying to gain context and overview and have looked at
only one source, you likely will have difficulty recognizing an author's
purpose and viewpoint. However, as you read further and begin to compare
and contrast one source with another, differences will emerge,
especially if you read extensively and take notes. The more differences
you note, the more critically aware you become and the more you
understand how and where a source might help you.

## Review Critically {#sect-00013}

To review a source with a critical eye, ask both first and second
questions of the text. The answers to first questions are generally
factual, the result of probing the text (identifying the title, table of
contents, chapter headings, index, and so on). The answers to second
questions are more inferential, the result of analyzing assertions,
evidence, and language in the text (identifying the perspective of the
author and their sources).

## Review Internally {#sect-00014}

*Does information in one source support or contradict information in
other sources?* Do a subject search of the author across platforms to
find out how other experts view the author and how your source fits in
with the author's other works.
