m00126

3d9985d9-dcc6-4a16-b87b-36c018a770a4

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Locate and create primary research materials.

Apply methods and technologies used for research and communication in
various fields.

[Introducing Research as Evidence](#) and [Compiling Sources for an
Annotated Bibliography](#) explain the difference between primary and
secondary sources in the research process. Almost all of the
source-gathering information in this chapter thus far has focused on
gathering secondary sources. However, your research assignment may
require that you use primary sources---not only those you find in the
library but also those you create yourself, outside the library, by
doing field research, also called fieldwork.

# Conducting Field Research {#sect-00002}

If not applicable for this class, you may be asked at some point in your
college career to conduct fieldwork, which is considered primary
research (the collection or development of primary sources). You may
already have engaged in primary research by performing experiments in a
laboratory for a science course or by documenting your observation of a
musical or artistic performance.

Fieldwork is the kind of research done when a person goes out into the
"field" to collect data. This term is often used by both biologists, who
may observe nature to understand plant growth, and anthropologists, who
observe people to understand human cultural habits. Social scientists
interested in language use and development, for example, have borrowed
the term *fieldwork* to describe the ways they collect data about how
people learn or use language. In fact, fieldwork is common to subjects
such as education, medicine, engineering, sociology, journalism,
criminology, and advertising.

Different disciplines---and different rhetorical situations---require
different kinds of fieldwork. If your task, for instance, is to find out
what consumers think of a new product, you may need to create and
distribute a survey or questionnaire. If you want to find out how many
people stop at a certain fast-food restaurant along the highway just to
use the restroom, as compared with the number of customers who purchase
food, you will have to spend some time observing the location.

No matter what kind of data you collect, the way you represent your
research in your written work requires careful attention to fairness and
accuracy. These ideas are particularly important when you write about
the people you interview or observe. The way you represent them, as well
as their words and actions, may present challenges. Be aware of those
challenges by considering personal biases as you write about your
research participants. Finally, be considerate of interviewees' time,
and acknowledge their help by sending a follow-up email thanking them.

## Planning Field Research {#sect-00003}

Unlike a library, which bundles millions of bits of every kind of
information in a single location, "fields" are everywhere, including the
campus of your university (academic departments, administrative offices,
labs, libraries, dining and sports facilities, and dormitories) as well
as the neighborhood beyond the campus (theaters, restaurants, malls,
parks, playgrounds, farms, factories, schools, and so on). Field
information is not cataloged, organized, indexed, or shelved for your
convenience. Obtaining it requires diligence, energy, and careful
planning. Some considerations are listed below:

Think about your research question.

What field sources might strengthen your argument or add to your report?

Select your contacts and sites.

Find the person, place, thing, or event that you would see as most
helpful to you. Will you set up observations, conduct interviews,
distribute surveys, or use a combination of methods?

Schedule research in advance.

Interviews, trips, and events don't always work out according to plans.
Allow time for glitches, such as having to reschedule an interview or
return for more information.

Do your homework.

Visit the library or do a Google search before conducting extensive
field research. No matter from whom or from where you intend to collect
information, having background knowledge can help you make more
insightful observations and formulate better interview questions.

Log what you find.

Record visits, questions, phone calls, and conversations in a

research log

. From the very beginning of your research, enter information about
topics, questions, methods, and answers into a journal, or use another
record-keeping method. Record even dead-end searches to remind yourself
that you tried them. This method of organizing information is the
writing task for this chapter and will be discussed at length in

Glance at the Research Process: Key Skills

and

Annotated Student Sample

.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Observation {#sect-00004}

In general, fieldwork that relies on observation as a method of data
collection involves taking notes while observing events, activities,
people, places, animals, and so on. Observations can range from a single
visit to one event or location to several visits over an extended
period. Consider your research question and topic to determine whether
you need to observe over time or just once to get the information you
need. You can prepare for your observation by doing some of the
preliminary work in your research log. At this time, consider the
limitations of only one observation session, which may yield only
partial information.

As you plan for your observation, and before you arrive, decide whether
you will be a participant observer, which involves taking part in what
you are observing. For example, if you observed a volleyball club
meeting that you attend regularly, and thus know most of its members or
join in activities, you would be a participant observer. You will need
to consider, though, how well you will be able to focus on the
observation tasks. *How actively will you participate in the
group/event? While participating, how frequently will you be able to jot
down notes or otherwise document your experience? Might you become
distracted and forget your observation tasks, and if so, how will you
handle that possibility?*

Another option is to be a nonparticipant observer. In this capacity, you
try to let your presence go unnoticed. Although you are there and
observing, you do not influence the situation in any way. If you sat in
a corner of an art class at your university to observe what materials
students use, for example, you would be an unobtrusive and
nonparticipant observer.

When you observe, take detailed notes; without them, you may forget much
of what you observed after you leave a site. After recording your notes
in your research log, review and rewrite your observation notes as soon
after your site visit as possible. Take precise notes, indicating the
color, shape, size, texture, and arrangement of everything relevant as
applicable. Pay special attention to any anomalies you notice in a
situation. Visual images provide excellent memory aids, so consider
sketching, photographing, or videotaping the site you visit. If you
speak your notes into a recording device, you will also pick up the
characteristic sounds of the site.

Your observation notes will become very important as you begin to
analyze your data. When you have finished observing, review your notes
to consider them for analysis. Ask yourself what kinds of questions or
conclusions your observations raise. Record your questions and
conclusions in the speculations section of your research log; this
material serves as your tentative interpretation of observation notes.
These questions and conclusions can help direct further analysis of what
you have observed and what you write based on those observations.

For example, consider that you want to determine whether seating is an
issue for students eating in on-campus restaurants. You might organize
your observations, questions, and speculations as shown in [\#](#).

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  *Observations*                      *Questions and Speculation*
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  Student enters campus restaurant    How many seats are available in the
  with friends. Friends look around   campus restaurant? Are students at
  for seating before rejoining        the tables eating, studying, or
  student at the counter. Friends     both? The students appear concerned
  take over five minutes to find an   about time and the opportunity to
  empty table that will seat them.    eat as a group.
  Both the students searching for     
  tables and the student at the       
  counter keep checking their         
  watches. The time is between        
  classes but later in the afternoon  
  than normal lunch time: 2:30.       

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Observations, questions, and speculations {#table-00001}

In the "Observations" column, the writer describes, whereas in the
"Questions and Speculation" column, the writer evaluates the situation.
The "Questions and Speculation" section is particularly important, as
different observers usually will have different interpretations.
Moreover, both columns might be different at different times of the day
or on different days of the week. To increase the validity of your
findings, you might get a second opinion on your interpretation by
sharing your observations with a peer.

## Surveys {#sect-00005}

Researchers in the social sciences often use surveys to collect data
from a large number of individuals or from groups of people. A survey is
a structured interview in which respondents are all asked the same
questions and their answers are tabulated and interpreted. A survey
would be a good source of data if, for example, you were comparing the
eating habits of students who eat off campus with those of students who
eat in college dining facilities. Or you may want to conduct research
that compares the overall eating habits of students in one on-campus
dining facility with those of students in another. You might ask
questions such as these:

How often do you eat at a campus facility? This question could provide
several options to assist survey takers with some ranges.

When you eat on campus, which of these dining facilities do you choose?
A list of the dining facilities you are comparing would follow this
question to refamiliarize survey takers with the names of the venues.

For research purposes, respondents to surveys can be treated as experts
because they are being asked for opinions or information about their own
behavior. Design your survey questions to be answered quickly and to
generate useful information about your topic. To get this kind of
information, ask questions skillfully. *What* and *who* questions are
easy for respondents to answer easily and accurately. Less valuable for
a survey is a *why* question, which requires a more thorough and planned
answer. Respondents are less likely to give the proper attention to a
*why* question for this reason. Furthermore, wording that suggests a
right or wrong answer reveals the researcher's biases more than the
subject's candid responses.

The format of the questioning and the way the research is conducted also
influence responses. For example, to get complete and honest answers
about a sensitive or highly personal issue, the researcher would
probably use anonymous written surveys to ensure confidentiality. Other
survey techniques include oral interviews in which the researcher
records each subject's responses on a written form. Surveys are usually
brief in order to gain the cooperation of a sufficiently large number of
respondents. To enable the researcher to compare answers, the questions
are usually closed, although researchers may sometimes ask open-ended
questions to gain additional information or insights. Treated briefly
here, surveys involve complex procedures for the designing of questions,
distribution of the survey, and assessment of the results.

A complication arises when a survey requests sensitive information, such
as personal experience with drugs, alcohol, or sex, from identifiable
subjects. Colleges and universities have "human subject" boards or
committees that need to approve any research that could compromise the
privacy of students, staff, or faculty. Consequently, consult your
instructor before launching any survey on or off campus. However, the
simple, informal polling of people to request opinions takes place quite
often in daily college life, such as every time a class takes a vote or
an instructor asks the class for opinions or interpretations of texts.

In one case, a student who was writing a self-profile wanted to find out
how others perceived her. First, she listed 10 people who knew her in
different ways---her mother, father, older sister, roommate, best
friend, favorite teacher, and so on. Next, she invited each to list five
words that best characterized her. Finally, she asked each to call her
answering machine on a day when she knew she would not be home and name
those five words. ln this way, she was able to collect original outside
opinion (fieldwork research) in a nonthreatening manner. She then wove
those opinions into her profile paper, combining them with her own
self-assessment. The external points of view added an interesting (and
sometimes surprising) view of herself as well as other voices to her
paper.

## Interviews {#sect-00006}

Conducting interviews is another method of gathering information.
Consulting, interviewing, and using information gathered from
professionals in specific fields can offer authoritative perspectives.
Other possibilities include interviewing people who have direct
experience with your research topic.

If you are comfortable talking to people you don't know, then you have a
head start as a successful interviewer. In many respects, a good
interview is simply a good conversation. If you consider yourself shy,
don't worry; you can still learn how to ask insightful interview
questions that will elicit useful answers. Before conducting an
interview, determine whether it is more appropriate to use a formal
question-and-answer session, an informal exchange of ideas, or something
in between.

Your chances of gathering helpful interview material increase
dramatically when you prepare ahead of time and formulate the questions
you want to ask. Consider the following guidelines:

Select the right person.

People differ in both the amount and the kind of knowledge they have.
Not everyone who knows something about your research topic will be able
to provide the information you need. Ask yourself

what information you need;

why you need it;

who is likely to have it; and

how you might gain it.

Most research projects benefit from more than one perspective, so plan
on more than one interview. For example, to research Lake Erie
pollution, you could interview someone who lives on the shore, a chemist
who knows about pesticide decomposition, a vice president of a nearby
paper company, and people who frequent the waterfront.

Know your subject.

Before you talk to an expert about your topic, make sure you know
something about it yourself. Be prepared to explain your interest in it,
know the general issues, and learn what your interview subject has
already said about it in books, articles, or interviews. ln this way,
you will ask sharper questions, get to the point faster, and be more
interesting for your subject to talk with.

Create a working script.

A good interview doesn't follow a script, but it usually starts with
one. Before you begin an interview, write the questions you plan to ask,
and arrange them so that they build on each other---general questions
first, specific ones later. Your written questions can remind you to get
back on track, should you or your subject digress.

Ask both open and closed questions.

Different kinds of questions elicit different kinds of information. Open
questions place few limits on the answers given:

Why did you decide to major in business? What are your plans for the
future?

Closed questions specify the information you want and usually elicit
brief responses:

When did you receive your degree? From what college?

Open questions usually provide general information; closed questions
supply details.

Ask follow-up questions.

Listen closely to the answers you receive. When the information is
incomplete or confusing, ask follow-up questions to request
clarification. Such questions are seldom scripted, so plan on using your
wits to direct your subject toward the information you consider most
important.

Use silence.

If you don't get an immediate response to a question, wait a bit before
asking another one. ln some cases, your question may not have been
clear, and you will need to rephrase it. But in many cases, your
interview subject is simply collecting their thoughts, not ignoring you.
After a slight pause, you may hear answers worth waiting for.

Read body language.

Be aware of what your subject is doing while answering questions.

Does the subject look you in the eye? Fidget and squirm? Look distracted
or bored? Smile?

From these visual cues, you may be able to infer when your subject is
speaking most frankly, doesn't want to give more information, or is
tired of answering questions.

Take content notes.

Many interviewers take notes on a pad that is spiral bound on top and
thus allows for quick page flipping. Don't try to write down everything,
just major ideas and telling statements in the subject's own words that
you might want to use as quotations in your paper. Omitting small words,
focusing on the most distinctive and precise language, and using common
abbreviations are all techniques to make taking notes more efficient.

Take context notes.

Note your subject's physical appearance, facial expressions, and
clothing as well as the interview setting itself. These details will be
useful later when you reconstruct the interview, helping you represent
it more vividly in your paper.

Record audio with permission only.

If you plan to record the interview, ask for permission in advance. The
advantage of recording is that you have a complete record of the
conversation. Sometimes, when hearing the interview subject a second
time, you notice important things you missed earlier. However, recording
devices may make subjects nervous. Be aware, too, that transcribing a
recording is time consuming. It's a good idea to have a pen in hand to
catch highlights or jot down additional questions.

Confirm important assertions.

When your subject says something especially important or controversial,
read back your notes aloud to check for accuracy and to allow your
subject to elaborate. Some interviewers do this during the interview,
while others do it at the end.

Review your notes.

Notes taken during an interview are brief reminders of what your subject
has said, not complete quotations. Write out the complete information as
soon after the interview as you can, certainly within 24 hours.
Supplement the notes with other remembered details while they are still
fresh, recording them in your research log or directly into a computer
file that you can refer to as you write your paper.

Interview electronically.

It is possible, and useful, to contact individuals electronically. Phone
interviews are quick and obvious ways of finding out information on
short notice. Even better is asking questions via email, which is less
intrusive than telephoning, as your subject can answer quickly,
specifically, and in writing at a convenient time. Other electronic
media for interviews include Skype, Zoom, Google Meet, and Microsoft
Teams. All of these tools allow you to see the interviewee physically
without having to travel for an in-person interview.
