m00127

f8c3fa1a-7a5a-442c-937f-0c6847881a27

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Locate and evaluate primary and secondary research materials, including
journal articles and essays, books, scholarly and professionally
established and maintained databases or archives, and informal
electronic networks and Internet sources.

Practice and apply strategies such as interpretation, synthesis,
response, and critique to compose texts that integrate the writer's
ideas with those from appropriate sources.

Apply methods and technologies commonly used for research and
communication in various fields.

Your task in writing an argumentative research paper as outlined in
[Writing Process: Integrating Research](#) is to present original
thinking that is supported by researched evidence. You may wonder how a
college student will think of anything new to say about a topic that
already has been researched by many others. First, keep in mind that
your original thinking does not necessarily have to be
groundbreaking---something never considered by others in the
field---though it might be. Your original thinking may be something
smaller but equally important, such as offering an alternative viewpoint
on some evidence, interpreting existing evidence in a new way that sheds
light on current questions in the field, or pointing out a flaw in the
current thinking regarding a topic.

# Synthesis {#sect-00002}

One skill that will help you develop this original thinking is
synthesis. As explained in [Writing Process: Integrating Research](#),
synthesis involves combining information gathered from various sources
and making connections among those sources to create a new, deeper, or
changed understanding of a topic. In other words, you examine how
information or opinions you have read in one place relate to what you
have read in another place or to your own thoughts. To practice the
skill of synthesis, use [\#](#), which illustrates how thinking can
change like ripples of water.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Keeping Track of Sources {#sect-00003}

Because unorganized or incorrectly documented research may be less than
useless, many researchers make the effort to keep their notes and
comments on their sources in a research log. An organized record of all
sources consulted, a research log includes publication information,
notes taken from the sources, and commentary about their relation to
other sources or to the thesis of your paper. Having a dynamic tool such
as this makes it easier to document sources in your works cited or
references list and place in-text citations in your paper. It also helps
with the research itself, showing at a glance what information you
already have and where it comes from so that you can avoid repetition.
Equally important, commentary on notes helps you synthesize information
efficiently.

# Key Research Skills {#sect-00004}

In addition to synthesis and research log maintenance, a good researcher
needs the following skills to perform required tasks:

Critical analysis:

Ability to think about what text or data means and how the parts relate
to the whole.

Critical thinking:

Ability to analyze, make inferences, evaluate, synthesize, and draw
conclusions on the basis of researched information.

Data collection:

Ability to gather facts and research on a topic through various kinds of
sources, field research, observation, interviews, surveys or
questionnaires, experimentation, and/or focus groups.

Field research:

Ability to collect raw data outside a laboratory, library, or workplace
setting; observation and data collection in the subject's natural
environment.

Interviewing:

Ability to engage in questions and answers with experts or those who
have knowledge to share regarding a research topic.

Note-taking:

Ability to identify and record information that will later be used to
support a thesis.

Organization:

Ability to plan, document, and track research to incorporate into a
unified composition.

Paraphrasing:

Ability to restate an idea in your own words.

Summarizing:

Ability to restate in your own words the main ideas and key details of a
text.

Synthesis:

Ability to combine information from different sources and make
connections among them to form a new conclusion or deeper understanding
of a topic.

Technology:

Ability to use computers, databases, and other forms of technology to
conduct research.

Time management:

Ability to plan research tasks over several weeks or months.
