m00129

db15ac96-ef53-45d5-a9d4-5b886492574f

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Employ the methods and technologies commonly used for research and
communication within various fields.

Practice and apply strategies such as interpretation, synthesis,
response, and critique to compose texts that integrate the writer's
ideas with those from appropriate sources.

Analyze and make informed decisions about intellectual property based on
the concepts that motivate them.

Apply citation conventions systematically.

As you conduct research, you will work with a range of "texts" in
various forms, including sources and documents from online databases as
well as images, audio, and video files from the Internet. You may also
work with archival materials and with transcribed and analyzed primary
data. Additionally, you will be taking notes and recording quotations
from secondary sources as you find materials that shape your
understanding of your topic and, at the same time, provide you with
facts and perspectives. You also may download articles as PDFs that you
then annotate. Like many other students, you may find it challenging to
keep so much material organized, accessible, and easy to work with while
you write a major research paper. As it does for many of those students,
a research log for your ideas and sources will help you keep track of
the scope, purpose, and possibilities of any research project.

A research log is essentially a journal in which you collect
information, ask questions, and monitor the results. Even if you are
completing the annotated bibliography for [Writing Process: Informing
and Analyzing](#), keeping a research log is an effective organizational
tool. Like Lily Tran's research log entry, most entries have three
parts: a part for notes on secondary sources, a part for connections to
the thesis or main points, and a part for your own notes or questions.
Record source notes by date, and allow room to add cross-references to
other entries.

# Summary of Assignment: Research Log {#sect-00002}

Your assignment is to create a research log similar to the student
model. You will use it for the argumentative research project assigned
in [Writing Process: Integrating Research](#) to record all secondary
source information: your notes, complete publication data, relation to
thesis, and other information as indicated in the right-hand column of
the sample entry.

Another Lens. A somewhat different approach to maintaining a research
log is to customize it to your needs or preferences. You can apply
[shading or color coding](#) to headers, rows, and/or columns in the
three-column format (for colors and shading). Or you can add columns to
accommodate more information, analysis, synthesis, or commentary,
formatting them as you wish. Consider adding a column for questions only
or one for connections to other sources. Finally, consider a different
[visual format](#), such as one without columns. Another possibility is
to record some of your comments and questions so that you have an aural
rather than a written record of these.

## Writing Center {#sect-00004}

At this point, or at any other point during the research and writing
process, you may find that your school's writing center can provide
extensive assistance. If you are unfamiliar with the writing center, now
is a good time to pay your first visit. Writing centers provide free
peer tutoring for all types and phases of writing. Discussing your
research with a trained writing center tutor can help you clarify,
analyze, and connect ideas as well as provide feedback on works in
progress.

# Beginning Questions {#sect-00005}

You may begin your research log with some open pages in which you
freewrite, exploring answers to the following questions. Although you
generally would do this at the beginning, it is a process to which you
likely will return as you find more information about your topic and as
your focus changes, as it may during the course of your research.

What information have I found so far?

What do I still need to find?

Where am I most likely to find it?

These are beginning questions. Like Lily Tran, however, you will come
across general questions or issues that a quick note or freewrite may
help you resolve. The key to this section is to revisit it regularly.
Written answers to these and other self-generated questions in your log
clarify your tasks as you go along, helping you articulate ideas and
examine supporting evidence critically. As you move further into the
process, consider answering the following questions in your freewrite:

What evidence looks as though it best supports my thesis?

What evidence challenges my working thesis?

How is my thesis changing from where it started?

# Creating the Research Log {#sect-00006}

As you gather source material for your argumentative research paper,
keep in mind that the research is intended to support original thinking.
That is, you are not writing an informational report in which you simply
supply facts to readers. Instead, you are writing to support a thesis
that shows original thinking, and you are collecting and incorporating
research into your paper to support that thinking. Therefore, a research
log, whether digital or handwritten, is a great way to keep track of
your thinking as well as your notes and bibliographic information.

In the model below, Lily Tran records the correct MLA bibliographic
citation for the source. Then, she records a note and includes the
in-text citation here to avoid having to retrieve this information
later. Perhaps most important, Tran records *why* she noted this
information---how it supports her thesis: *The human race must turn to
sustainable food systems that provide healthy diets with minimal
environmental impact, starting now*. Finally, she makes a note to
herself about an additional visual to include in the final paper to
reinforce the point regarding the current pressure on food systems. And
she connects the information to other information she finds, thus
cross-referencing and establishing a possible synthesis. Use a format
similar to that in [\#](#) to begin your own research log.

+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------------------+
| *Information*        | *Connection to       | *Notes/Cross-References/Synthesis* |
|                      | Thesis/Main Points*  |                                    |
+======================+======================+====================================+
| *Date:* 6/06/2021    |                      | Maybe include a graph showing the  |
|                      |                      | rising pressure on food systems.   |
| It has been          | Shows the pressure   |                                    |
| estimated, for       | being put on food    | Connects to similar predictions    |
| example, that by     | systems that will    | about produce and vegan diets. See |
| 2050, milk           | cause the need for   | Lynch et al.                       |
| production will      | more sustainable     |                                    |
| increase 58 percent  | systems              |                                    |
| and meat production  |                      |                                    |
| 73 percent (Chai).   |                      |                                    |
+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------------------+
| *Source/Citation:* Chai, Bingil Clark, et al. "Which Diet Has the Least          |
| Environmental Impact on Our Planet? A Systematic Review of Vegan, Vegetarian and |
| Omnivorous Diets." *Sustainability*, vol. 11, no. 15, 2019,                      |
| [www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/11/15/4110](#). Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.                    |
+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------------------+
| *Date:*              |                      |                                    |
+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------------------+
| *Source/Citation:*                                                               |
+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------------------+
| *Date:*              |                      |                                    |
+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------------------+
| *Source/Citation:*   |                      |                                    |
+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------------------+

: Model research log {#table-00001}

# Types of Research Notes {#sect-00007}

Taking good notes will make the research process easier by enabling you
to locate and remember sources and use them effectively. While some
research projects requiring only a few sources may seem easily tracked,
research projects requiring more than a few sources are more effectively
managed when you take good bibliographic and informational notes. As you
gather evidence for your argumentative research paper, follow the
descriptions and the electronic model to record your notes. You can
combine these with your research log, or you can use the research log
for secondary sources and your own note-taking system for primary
sources if a division of this kind is helpful. Either way, be sure to
include all necessary information.

## Bibliographic Notes {#sect-00008}

These identify the source you are using. When you locate a useful
source, record the information necessary to find that source again. It
is important to do this as you find each source, even before taking
notes from it. If you create bibliographic notes as you go along, then
you can easily arrange them in alphabetical order later to prepare the
reference list required at the end of formal academic papers. If your
instructor requires you to use MLA formatting for your essay, be sure to
record the following information:

Author

Title of source

Title of container (larger work in which source is included)

Other contributors

Version

Number

Publisher

Publication date

Location

When using MLA style with online sources, also record the following
information:

Date of original publication

Date of access

URL

DOI (A DOI, or digital object identifier, is a series of digits and
letters that leads to the location of an online source. Articles in
journals are often assigned DOIs to ensure that the source can be
located, even if the URL changes. If your source is listed with a DOI,
use that instead of a URL.)

It is important to understand which documentation style your instructor
will require you to use. Check the Handbook for [MLA Documentation and
Format](#) and [APA Documentation and Format styles](#). In addition,
you can check the style guide information provided by the [Purdue Online
Writing Lab](#).

## Informational Notes {#sect-00009}

These notes record the relevant information found in your sources. When
writing your essay, you will work from these notes, so be sure they
contain all the information you need from every source you intend to
use. Also try to focus your notes on your research question so that
their relevance is clear when you read them later. To avoid confusion,
work with separate entries for each piece of information recorded. At
the top of each entry, identify the source through brief bibliographic
identification (author and title), and note the page numbers on which
the information appears. Also helpful is to add personal notes,
including ideas for possible use of the information or cross-references
to other information. As noted in [Writing Process: Integrating
Research](#), you will be using a variety of formats when borrowing from
sources. Below is a quick review of these formats in terms of
note-taking processes. By clarifying whether you are quoting directly,
paraphrasing, or summarizing during these stages, you can record
information accurately and thus take steps to avoid plagiarism.

## Direct Quotations, Paraphrases, and Summaries {#sect-00010}

A direct quotation is an exact duplication of the author's words as they
appear in the original source. In your notes, put quotation marks around
direct quotations so that you remember these words are the author's, not
yours. One advantage of copying exact quotations is that it allows you
to decide later whether to include a quotation, paraphrase, or summary.
ln general, though, use direct quotations only when the author's words
are particularly lively or persuasive.

A paraphrase is a restatement of the author's words in your own words.
Paraphrase to simplify or clarify the original author's point. In your
notes, use paraphrases when you need to record details but not exact
words.

A summary is a brief condensation or distillation of the main point and
most important details of the original source. Write a summary in your
own words, with facts and ideas accurately represented. A summary is
useful when specific details in the source are unimportant or irrelevant
to your research question. You may find you can summarize several
paragraphs or even an entire article or chapter in just a few sentences
without losing useful information. It is a good idea to note when your
entry contains a summary to remind you later that it omits detailed
information. See [Writing Process Integrating Research](#) for more
detailed information and examples of quotations, paraphrases, and
summaries and when to use them.

# Other Systems for Organizing Research Logs and Digital Note-Taking {#sect-00011}

Students often become frustrated and at times overwhelmed by the
quantity of materials to be managed in the research process. If this is
your first time working with both primary and secondary sources, finding
ways to keep all of the information in one place and well organized is
essential.

Because gathering primary evidence may be a relatively new practice,
this section is designed to help you navigate the process. As mentioned
earlier, information gathered in fieldwork is not cataloged, organized,
indexed, or shelved for your convenience. Obtaining it requires
diligence, energy, and planning. Online resources can assist you with
keeping a research log. Your college library may have subscriptions to
tools such as Todoist or EndNote. Consult with a librarian to find out
whether you have access to any of these. If not, use something like the
template shown in [\#](#), or another like it, as a template for
creating your own research notes and organizational tool. You will need
to have a record of all field research data as well as the research log
for all secondary sources.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>
