m00130

eb69ba9a-f0a5-469e-8fb3-9a47861ca239

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Participate effectively in collaborative processes involving field
research in a variety of disciplines.

Develop projects using the characteristic processes of various
disciplines.

Analyze and make informed decisions about intellectual property based on
the concepts that motivate them.

Apply citation conventions systematically.

Whenever you do research, especially field research involving human
participants, fair and ethical treatment of your subjects is expected.
Included in this treatment are respect for privacy and, when required,
anonymity. Related to fair and ethical treatment is your respect for the
work of others, as demonstrated by attributing credit to sources from
which you borrow information. Not doing so is one aspect of plagiarism.

# Working with Human Participants and Institutional Review Boards {#sect-00002}

To comply with federal regulations and ethical principles, universities
maintain institutional review boards (IRBs) that monitor how researchers
treat their research participants. A range of research involvement
exists when working with human subjects; whether your research involves
taking blood samples, conducting psychological experiments, or simply
distributing surveys, you must be aware of and consult your university's
IRB for policies and guidelines. In most cases, as undergraduates, you
will not be working on research that is potentially risky or harmful to
human participants. For example, it is unlikely you will be involved in
conducting medical or psychological research. However, you may work on a
project that requires field research such as interviews or observations.
Although participants in a fieldwork project will probably not incur the
same amount of risk as participants in clinical experiments, the IRB may
have some questions nonetheless:

Will participation be voluntary?

Will the selection of research subjects be fair?

Will confidentiality be preserved?

Will there be any risks to participants?

Will the study yield important results for society?

Whenever you conduct fieldwork, whether it is via interviews,
observations, or surveys, keep in mind ethical considerations for your
participants and the ways you represent them in your work. See [Tracing
a Broad Issue in the Individual](#) for more information.

# Plagiarism {#sect-00003}

Plagiarism is putting one's name on a paper written by a friend and
submitting it as one's own. Plagiarism is buying or downloading a paper
from an Internet site and pretending to have written it. And plagiarism
is pasting in a phrase, sentence, paragraph, passage, or portion of
anybody else's work in a paper and not giving that author credit. ln
these examples, the intent to plagiarize is deliberate and obvious,
something that serious and honorable students would never do.

However, plagiarism also occurs when well-meaning students get careless
when taking notes or copying notes into actual drafts. Following are
three examples of unintentional plagiarism:

A student copies a passage word for word from an Internet site and
pastes it into a paper but forgets to include quotation marks or author
attribution.

A student summarizes a published author's idea but omits both author
name and source title.

A student credits an author's idea in a signal phrase (According to John
Smith . . .) but omits quotation marks around the author's exact
phrases.

All of these may be unintentional, but each is an act of plagiarism,
easily avoidable by more careful research and writing practice.

## What Plagiarism Is Not {#sect-00004}

While you cannot publish the work of others, you may publish material
that is common knowledge---that is, historical, cultural, or
geographical information that an educated adult would be expected to
know. Nor do you need to attribute material that appears in multiple
sources, such as dates of historical events, names and locations of
states and cities, general laws of science, and statements of well-known
theories.

You do not need to document phrases in widespread use in your culture or
well-known information found in textbooks or lectures in the field in
which you are writing. For example, in a paper written about Austrian
psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud (1856--1939) for a psychology class, you
would not document the term *superego*, a word Freud frequently used.
For more about what plagiarism is and is not, see [Spotlight on ...
Citation](#).

## Avoiding Plagiarism {#sect-00005}

Ensuring that your voice, ideas, critical thinking, connections, and
analysis are the focus of your essay and not allowing borrowed materials
to "take over" are critical to avoiding plagiarism. Additionally,
keeping an accurate research log will assist you in recording,
attributing, and clearly citing borrowed materials. When you think about
plagiarism, consider what seems fair and how you might feel if someone
were to use your work without giving you credit. Here are a few tips for
avoiding plagiarism:

In your research log, and subsequently in your essay, put quotation
marks around language that comes directly from your sources. Use
internal citations and appropriate reference pages for academic papers.

Use internal citations for paraphrases and summaries, and do your best
to capture the sentiment of the author you cite, even when using your
own words.

Keep accurate, thorough research notes so that you have the source
information you need to work efficiently and cite accurately. For all
copied sources, write who said what, where, and when. When quoting
directly, do not distort or intentionally modify an author's meaning.

Plan your work schedule to allow time for careful reading of your
sources and effective use of them.

Another way to avoid plagiarism is to make sure that you have enough
time to write and revise your project multiple times. Many students
often find that postponing or avoiding the research process forces them
to become rushed and to present a product that reflects insufficient
attention to attribution.

# Research Aids {#sect-00006}

Here are a few resources that you may find helpful throughout your
research processes.

"Your Research Toolbox," University of Massachusetts Amherst:
https://people.umass.edu/curtis/academics/researchtoolbox/researchlog.html

"Observing," Purdue Online Writing Lab (notes on conducting fieldwork):
https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/research_and_citation/conducting_research/conducting_primary_research/observing.html

"Using Citation Generators Responsibly," Purdue Online Writing Lab:
https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/research_and_citation/using_citation_machines_responsibly.html

# Work Cited {#sect-00007}

*OWL: The Purdue Online Writing Lab*. Purdue U, 2021,
owl.purdue.edu/owl/purdue_owl.html. Accessed 25 Jan. 2021.
