m00146

5ee6eb2c-8307-455b-a94b-56b2f3b7c6c2

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

In the real world, you are surrounded by text---both visual and print.
It appears in media, advertising, and even text messages. Often, text is
not one-dimensional, in the sense that words and the ways in which they
are used or arranged can have different meanings depending on the
relationship between the text and the reader. In such cases, a text is
open to analysis and interpretation. Usually, there is no one right way
to analyze and interpret a text; readers, like viewers, may understand
elements in different ways and draw different conclusions. Whatever they
are, however, will be the result of reading critically: examining parts
of the text as they relate to the whole, supporting ideas with evidence,
and drawing conclusions on the basis of analysis.

The practice of analysis will benefit you in several ways. It can help
you enter an ongoing conversation with a new and fresh perspective. It
also can help you understand meaning beyond the surface of a
text---including historical contexts and cultures, new approaches to
thinking, and new knowledge.

Although the word *text* tends to imply words, writing, or books,
virtually all works created by human beings can be considered texts that
are open to analysis---films, plays, music and dance performances,
exhibits, paintings, photographs, sculptures, advertisements, artifacts,
buildings, and even whole cultures. In this chapter, you will focus on
the analysis of print texts. In [Image Analysis: What You See](#), you
will move to the analysis of visual and digital texts.
