m00148

b5cfae50-de29-4daa-9336-63b51c600825

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Demonstrate critical thinking and communicating in varying rhetorical
and cultural contexts.

Integrate the writer's ideas with ideas of others.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

"Writing and performing should deepen the meaning of words, should
illuminate, transfix, and transform."
::::

# Talking Back {#sect-00002}

Born Gloria Jean Watkins, bell hooks adopted the name of her
great-grandmother, a woman known for speaking her mind. In choosing this
pen name, hooks decided not to capitalize the first letters so that
audiences would focus on her work rather than her name. However, this
stylistic choice has become as memorable as her work.

She is well known for her approach to social critique through textual
analysis. The writing interests and research methods hooks uses are wide
ranging. They began in poetry and fiction writing and eventually
developed into critical analysis. She started writing at an early age,
as her teachers (in the church) impressed on hooks the power in
language. With this exposure to language, hooks began to understand the
"sacredness of words" and began to write poetry and fiction. Over time,
hooks's writing became more focused on advancing and reviving the texts
of Black women and women of color, for even though "black women and
women of color are publishing more... there is still not enough" writing
by and about them. Texts live on through others' analyses, hooks argues.
Therefore, she believes the critical essay "is the most useful form for
the expression" between her thoughts and the books she is reading. The
critical essay allows hooks to create a dialogue, or "talk back" to the
text. The critical essay also extends "the conversations I have with
other critical thinkers." It is this "talking back" that has advanced
hooks's approach to literary criticism. This action, for which hooks
eventually named a volume of essays, refers to the development of a
strong sense of self that allows Black women to speak out against racism
and sexism.

Although young hooks continued to write poetry---some of which was
published---she gained a reputation as a writer of critical essays about
systems of domination. She began writing her first book, *Ain't I a
Woman: Black Women and Feminism*, when she was 19 and an undergraduate
student at Stanford University. The book is titled after Sojourner
Truth's (1797--1883) ["Ain't I a Woman" speech](#) given at the Woman's
Rights Convention in Akron, Ohio, in 1851. In this work, hooks examines
the effects of racism and sexism on Black women, the civil rights
movement, and feminist movements from suffrage to the 1970s. By "talking
back" to formerly enslaved abolitionist Sojourner Truth throughout,
hooks identifies ways in which feminist movements have failed to focus
on Black women and women of color. This work is one of many in which
thorough analysis "uncovered" the lived experiences of Black women and
women of color.

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00003}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
