m00149

b12ea1d1-befd-4661-abb8-6e2b1ce5fed1

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define key terms and organizational patterns of textual analysis.

Explain how genre conventions are shaped by purpose, culture, and
expectation.

As a genre---or literary category in which works feature similar forms,
styles, or subject matter---textual analysis is less of a genre in
itself and more of an exploration and interpretation of other genres.
That is, textual analysis is explanatory and interpretive. When you
receive an assignment to analyze a text, you focus on the elements that
give it meaning. Usually your instructor will assign a specific writing
task: to analyze and explain certain aspects of a text, to compare or
contrast certain elements within a single text or in two or more texts,
or to relate certain text elements to historical context or current
events (as student writer Gwyn Garrison has done in the [Annotated
Student Sample](#)). These writing tasks thus explore genre
characteristics of fiction, drama, poetry, literary nonfiction, film,
and other forms of literary language.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

When you write a textual analysis, ask yourself questions such as these:

In what ways can this text be read?

What are some different ways of reading it?

Which reading makes the most sense to me?

Which passages in the text support this reading?

Whom does my analysis need to convince? (Who is my audience?)

# Textual Analysis and Interpretive Communities {#sect-00002}

How you read and analyze a text depends on who you are. Who you are
depends on the influences that have shaped you, or the communities to
which you belong. Everyone belongs to various communities: families,
social and economic groups (e.g., students or teachers, middle or
working class), organizations (e.g., Democratic or Republican Party,
Masons, Habitat for Humanity), geographic locales (e.g., rural or urban,
north or south), and institutions (e.g., school, church, fraternity).
Your membership in one or more communities may determine how you view
and respond to the world. The communities that influence you most are
called interpretive communities; they influence the meaning you make of
the world. People who belong to the same community may well have similar
assumptions and therefore are likely to analyze texts in similar ways.

Before writing an interpretive or textual analysis essay, it is helpful
to ask, *Who am I when writing this piece?* Be aware of your age,
gender, race, ethnic identity, economic class, geographic location,
educational level, or political or religious persuasion. Ask to what
extent and for what purpose any of these identities emerges in your
writing. Readers will examine the biases you may bring to your work,
understanding that everyone views the world---and, consequently,
texts---from their own vantage point.

College is, of course, a large interpretive community. The various
smaller communities that exist within it are called disciplines:
English, history, biology, business, art, and so on. Established ways of
interpreting texts exist within disciplines. Often when you write a
textual analysis, you will do so from the perspective of a traditional
academic interpretive community or from the perspective of one who
challenges that community.

Whether you deliberately identify yourself and any biases you might
bring with you in your essay depends on the assignment you are given.
Some assignments ask you to remove your personal perspective as much as
possible from your writing, others ask that you acknowledge and explain
it, and others fall somewhere in between.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

# Conventions of Textual Analysis {#sect-00003}

When asked to analyze or interpret a literary work, whether fiction or
nonfiction, you will likely focus on some of these literary elements to
explain how an author uses them to make meaning.

Alliteration:

literary device consisting of repetition of initial consonant sounds.
("Away from the steamy sidewalk, the children sat in a circle.")

Analysis:

close examination and explanation of a text, supported by reasoning and
evidence.

Antagonist:

character or force opposing the main character (protagonist) in a story.

Climax:

moment of emotional or intellectual intensity or a point in the plot
when one opposing force overcomes another and the conflict is resolved.

Epiphany:

flash of intuitive understanding by the narrator or a character in a
story.

Figurative language:

language that suggests special meanings or effects. Similes and
metaphors are examples of figurative, rather than literal, language.
("She stands like a tree, solid and rooted.")

Imagery:

language that appeals to one (or more) of the five senses. ("The cicadas
hummed nonstop all day, but never loud enough to dull the roar of the
leaf blowers.)

Metaphor:

direct comparison between two unlike things. ("She is a sly fox in her
undercover work for the government.")

Narrator:

someone who tells a story. A character narrator is a part of the story,
whereas an omniscient narrator tells a story about others.

Persona:

mask to disguise or cover the author's real self when presenting a story
or other literary work.

Plot:

sequence of events in a story or play.

Point of view:

vantage point from which a story or event is perceived and told. The
most frequently used points of view are first person and third person.
In first person, the narrator is a character or observer in the story
(fiction) or the author of it (nonfiction). In third person, the
narrator has no part in the story other than telling it.

Protagonist:

main character or hero in a story.

Rhyme:

repetition of sounds, usually at the ends of lines in poems, but also
occurring at other intervals in a line.

Rhythm:

rise and fall of stressed sounds within sentences, paragraphs, and
stanzas.

Simile:

indirect comparison of unlike things using the word

as

or

like

. ("When he does undercover work, he is as sly as a fox.")

Symbol:

object that represents itself and something else at the same time. A red
rose is both a rose of a certain color and the suggestion of something
romantic.

Theme:

meaning or thesis of a literary text.
