m00150

68b222c5-bbf7-4615-bd9e-51fa281c6223

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Demonstrate understanding of how conventions are shaped by purpose,
language, culture, and expectation.

Demonstrate critical thinking and communicating in varying rhetorical
and cultural contexts.

Make connections between ideas and patterns of organization.

Evaluate literary elements and strategies used in textual analysis.

# Introduction {#sect-00002}

Student Gwyn Garrison wrote this textual analysis for a first-year
composition class. In the essay, Garrison extends her analysis beyond
the texts to discuss outside events and real individuals, making
connections among them.

# The Power of Language {#sect-00003}

Language is the medium through which the communication of ideas takes
place. One of language's many attributes is its ability both to reflect
and to shape social attitudes. Language has the power to perpetuate
oppression when dominant social groups choose the ways in which
rebellious behavior is described. Thus, people in power historically
have used language as propaganda to perpetuate the ideas that they want
to reiterate. For example, if a woman in modern society is described as
*ladylike,* the message is that she conforms to traditional gender
expectations of politeness, modesty, and deference. However, if a woman
is called a *whore,* the message is that the woman does not conform to
these traditional gender standards. In recent years, oppressed social
groups have learned that they can reclaim the language of the oppressor
by redefining such words and their connotations.

*Gwyn Garrison uses reaction---reflection or thinking---to introduce the
"big idea" of the thesis: language has the power to shape cultural and
social attitudes.*

American authors such as Kate Chopin and Shirley Jackson, sociopolitical
activists such as Hillary Clinton and Chrissy Teigen, and California
rape survivor Chanel Miller--- artists/writers in their own ways---take
on this essential work of reclaiming language on behalf of all women.
This confiscation of the tools of the oppressor is an essential step
toward building a society in which women may be free to be who they are.
Negative stereotypical labeling no longer has the effect of
disempowering women because language can be reclaimed from the oppressor
as a form of empowerment.

*Garrison's thesis statement highlights her analytical approach. She
makes a connection between women's rights and a series of texts by
significant women.*

Writers can use the short story form to shift perception away from the
lens of the status quo and focus perception in a new way. In Kate
Chopin's 1898 short story "The Storm" (text follows this discussion),
protagonist Calixta engages in a passionate extramarital affair with an
old friend, Alcée. Readers may argue that Calixta's actions should be
labeled as immoral by both societal and religious standards because she
breaks the social and religious contract defined by her marriage vows.
Yet every other action of Calixta's complies with traditional gender
roles: she is a wife, mother, and caretaker. In some ways, committing
this one social transgression seems completely out of character when she
meets traditional gender expectations in all other areas of her life.

*Garrison provides publication information as well as a brief plot
summary and context for the story. You can read "The Storm" in its
entirety at the end of this feature.*

When Calixta acts outside of societal norms, however, she discovers the
freedom of self-expression and passion.

*This transitional topic sentence supports the overall thesis while also
identifying what the paragraph will be about.*

All parts of her womanhood that have no place in the society in which
she lives have been repressed until this one moment. In this scene,
Chopin takes possession of the term *whore* and redefines Calixta's
behavior as a transformative awakening.

*This explanation makes a reference to the language of the text and
explains the significance of the scene as it relates to the entire story
and to Garrison's thesis.*

Chopin's diction evokes a spiritual transcendence that allows Calixta to
live momentarily outside social norms present only in the physical plane
of existence: "when he possessed her, they seemed to swoon together at
the very borderland of life's mystery."

*Here, Garrison correctly cites textual evidence---an example of the
protagonist's diction--- to support her reasoning.*

The affair becomes a vehicle that allows Calixta to get to a place of
true self-expression. The storm, an aspect of nature or the natural
world, acts as the catalyst in Calixta's natural self-realization of
womanhood. As the storm breaks externally, it also breaks internally for
Calixta. Chopin's depiction of Calixta's sexual liberation and
fulfillment outside of her marriage is an early step in the fight to
bridge the gap between women's bodies and their sociopolitical lives. By
presenting female sexuality in a way that is enlightening rather than
degrading, Chopin helps destigmatize labels such as *whore,* which have
been used to shame women for acting outside of traditional gender
expectations.

*Garrison further elaborates on the significance of the textual evidence
and connects it to the topic sentence and thesis. In this case, it is
the storm---an element of both plot and setting as well as a symbol.*

In Shirley Jackson's novel *We Have Always Lived in the Castle,*
Merricat and her sister Constance are rumored to be witches who,
according to village gossip, eat children. The label of *witch* has long
been a device to oppress women who do not conform to traditional gender
roles. In Salem, Massachusetts, during the 17th-century witch trials,
women who could read or write, who refused marriage, or who practiced
alternative religions often were labeled as witches and burned to death.

*Introducing a second text for comparison, Garrison revisits the idea of
language reclamation introduced earlier.*

In Jackson's novel, Merricat embraces the notion of being labeled a
witch. In fact, she facilitates the rumors by burying talismans,
identifying magical words, and talking to her cat, Jonas. In contrast to
the witch trials, Merricat burns her own house to rid it of her male
cousin. And she survives the fire, purging herself and her sister of the
family's patriarchal tendencies. By claiming the role of witch, Merricat
insulates herself and her sister from their patriarchal family and
society. In the end, Merricat creates a space where she and Constance
can live together in a woman-centered territory outside the reach of the
villagers.

*Focusing on language and its implications, Garrison discusses the use
of* witch*, a label the character is happy to embrace as a means of
asserting her womanhood.*

With this story, Jackson does the important work of reclaiming the word
*witch,* stripping it of its oppressive power and redefining it for
womankind.

*In the section that follows, Garrison moves outside literary texts and
extends her analysis to language use in contemporary political
situations, thus connecting literature with reality. Notice that
Garrison has used the literary present tense in discussing both Chopin's
and Jackson's fiction. She switches and uses mostly past tense now in
discussing nonliterary events.*

Similarly, in a more recent political climate, former U.S. president
Donald Trump employed stereotypical derogatory language against women
whom he considered dissenters. He used phrases like "such a nasty woman"
(Ali) to describe former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and "filthy
mouthed wife" (@realDonaldTrump) to describe model Chrissy Teigen to try
to shame women with social influence into submission. It is noteworthy,
too, that he describes Teigen by her role in relation to a man rather
than by her name, which would indicate her individuality. Both Clinton
and Teigen, along with millions of women around the world, have worked
to empower women by redefining such language. Almost immediately
following the accusation of "such a nasty woman," women and girls around
the country donned t-shirts and ball caps with the phrase, showing their
pride in being "nasty" (Ali). In this context, the term came to describe
women who speak truth to power. Although Teigen acknowledges that she
had previously been blocked by Trump for trolling him, she shot back
defiantly at him with a tweet that read in part: "lol what p--- a---
b---" (@chrissyteigen). Shortly thereafter, the phrase was trending as a
Twitter hashtag (Butler). In this instance, people, particularly women,
appreciated Teigen's ability to respond to female shaming with language
that Trump himself was recorded using and that is also traditionally
used to shame and degrade women. This time, however, it was directed
toward a powerful man. This reclamation of power through language is one
step women have taken to revise the social gender narrative for a modern
context.

*Again, Garrison introduces texts for comparison, bringing her argument
regarding the reclamation of language into the modern day.*

After four years of being known as "the girl raped by Stanford swimmer
Brock Turner," sexual assault survivor Chanel Miller has reclaimed the
narrative of her story with the publication of her memoir *Know My
Name.* After a Stanford University fraternity party in January 2015,
Turner assaulted (with intent to rape) an intoxicated and unconscious
Miller behind a dumpster at approximately 1:00 a.m. Some passing
students interrupted the act, and Turner was taken by the police after
the students restrained him. He was later brought to trial and found
guilty. The sympathetic male judge sentenced Turner to only six months
in county jail, from which he was released after three months for good
behavior. When speaking on television to *60 Minutes* on September 22,
2019, Miller expressed outrage that media coverage during the trial had
focused not on what Miller had already lost but on what Turner had to
lose if found guilty---his education, his swimming career, his Olympic
prospects (Miller). Because Miller remained anonymous during the trial,
the media and Turner's lawyers controlled how she was perceived to the
world---as a girl who got drunk and put herself into a compromising
situation.

*Garrison emphasizes the role of language in Miller's telling her story
and ceasing to feel ashamed.*

This male-centric characterization of events left Miller feeling ashamed
and disempowered. By writing her book and reclaiming her story, Miller
took a vital step in healing and trauma management, emphasizing that she
now controls the language of her narrative. She is not a girl who
deserves what she got, as some would argue. Miller readily acknowledges
she deserved a hangover for her actions, but never a rape.

*Notice the switching of tenses to indicate events in the past and
present. Notice, too, that Garrison returns to the literary present
tense in the paragraph that follows.*

Miller's story is all too common in the college partying scene, and the
regularity of such attacks contributes to the perpetuation of an
environment in which women are made to feel responsible for being
attacked and men are free to act as they choose. The awareness of
Miller's story and, more importantly, her published story, reframe the
narrative around rape culture so that the victims are not further
victimized, as women work to educate men so that these attacks stop.

*Garrison introduces a final contemporary text for comparison. By citing
multiple texts across time, Garrison strengthens her argument.*

Artists and writers such as Chopin, Jackson, Clinton, Teigen, and Miller
engage in the gritty work of social reform that cannot be achieved
through any other medium because culture cannot change unless the
language in which people talk about the culture changes. This socially
reformed reality is conceived only from the creativity of intelligent
minds that are able both to envision and then to describe the world as
it is yet to exist. In this way, artists who work with the medium of
language become the prophets.

*This conclusion looks to the future, which is a productive rhetorical
or persuasive technique to give the audience an idea about what they can
take away from this project.*

## Works Cited {#sect-00004}

Ali, Lorraine. "'Such a Nasty Woman': Trump's Debate Dig Becomes a
Feminist Rallying Cry." *Los Angeles Times*, 20 Oct. 2016,
www.latimes.com/entertainment/tv/la-et-nasty-woman-trump-clinton-debate-jane-jackson-20161020-snap-story.html.

Butler, Bethonie. "Trump Called Chrissy Teigen a 'Filthy Mouthed Wife.'
Her Response Reflects Years of Social Media Savvy." *Washington Post*,
10 Sept. 2019,
www.washingtonpost.com/arts-entertainment/2019/09/10/trump-called-chrissy-teigen-filthy-mouthed-wife-her-response-reflects-years-social-media-savvy/.

Chopin, Kate. "The Storm." 1898. *American Literature.com*, 2018,
americanliterature.com/author/kate-chopin/short-story/the-storm.

\@chrissyteigen. "lol what a pussy ass bitch. tagged everyone but me. an
honor, mister president." *Twitter*, 8 Sept. 2019, 11:17 p.m.
https://twitter.com/chrissyteigen/status/1170914148919590914?lang=en.

Jackson, Shirley. *We Have Always Lived in the Castle.* Penguin
Classics, 1962.

Miller, Chanel. "Interview with Bill Whitaker." *60 Minutes.* 22 Sept.
2019.

\@realDonaldTrump. "\...musician \@johnlegend, and his filthy mouthed
wife, are talking now about how great it is - but I didn't see them
around when we needed help getting it passed. "Anchor"@LesterHoltNBC
doesn't even bring up the subject of President Trump or the Republicans
when talking about\..." *Twitter*, 8 Sept. 2019, 10:11 p.m.

*Garrison follows MLA guidelines to cite her sources.*

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00005}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

# For Reference: "The Storm" by Kate Chopin (1850--1904) {#sect-00006}

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

The leaves were so still that even Bibi thought it was going to rain.
Bobinôt, who was accustomed to converse on terms of perfect equality
with his little son, called the child's attention to certain sombre
clouds that were rolling with sinister intention from the west,
accompanied by a sullen, threatening roar. They were at Friedheimer's
store and decided to remain there till the storm had passed. They sat
within the door on two empty kegs. Bibi was four years old and looked
very wise.

"Mama'll be 'fraid, yes," he suggested with blinking eyes.

"She'll shut the house. Maybe she got Sylvie helpin' her this evenin',"
Bobinôt responded reassuringly.

"No; she ent got Sylvie. Sylvie was helpin' her yistiday," piped Bibi.

Bobinôt arose and going across to the counter purchased a can of
shrimps, of which Calixta was very fond. Then he returned to his perch
on the keg and sat stolidly holding the can of shrimps while the storm
burst. It shook the wooden store and seemed to be ripping great furrows
in the distant field. Bibi laid his little hand on his father's knee and
was not afraid.

## II {#sect-00008}

Calixta, at home, felt no uneasiness for their safety. She sat at a side
window sewing furiously on a sewing machine. She was greatly occupied
and did not notice the approaching storm. But she felt very warm and
often stopped to mop her face on which the perspiration gathered in
beads. She unfastened her white sacque at the throat. It began to grow
dark, and suddenly realizing the situation she got up hurriedly and went
about closing windows and doors.

Out on the small front gallery she had hung Bobinôt's Sunday clothes to
dry and she hastened out to gather them before the rain fell. As she
stepped outside, Alcée Laballière rode in at the gate. She had not seen
him very often since her marriage, and never alone. She stood there with
Bobinôt's coat in her hands, and the big rain drops began to fall. Alcée
rode his horse under the shelter of a side projection where the chickens
had huddled and there were plows and a harrow piled up in the corner.

"May I come and wait on your gallery till the storm is over, Calixta?"
he asked.

"Come 'long in, M'sieur Alcée."

His voice and her own startled her as if from a trance, and she seized
Bobinôt's vest. Alcée, mounting to the porch, grabbed the trousers and
snatched Bibi's braided jacket that was about to be carried away by a
sudden gust of wind. He expressed an intention to remain outside, but it
was soon apparent that he might as well have been out in the open: the
water beat in upon the boards in driving sheets, and he went inside,
closing the door after him. It was even necessary to put something
beneath the door to keep the water out.

"My! what a rain! It's good two years since it rain' like that,"
exclaimed Calixta as she rolled up a piece of bagging and Alcée helped
her to thrust it beneath the crack.

She was a little fuller of figure than five years before when she
married; but she had lost nothing of her vivacity. Her blue eyes still
retained their melting quality; and her yellow hair, dishevelled by the
wind and rain, kinked more stubbornly than ever about her ears and
temples.

The rain beat upon the low, shingled roof with a force and clatter that
threatened to break an entrance and deluge them there. They were in the
dining room---the sitting room---the general utility room. Adjoining was
her bedroom, with Bibi's couch alongside her own. The door stood open,
and the room with its white, monumental bed, its closed shutters, looked
dim and mysterious.

Alcée flung himself into a rocker and Calixta nervously began to gather
up from the floor the lengths of a cotton sheet which she had been
sewing.

"If this keeps up, *Dieu sait* if the levees goin' to stan it!" she
exclaimed.

"What have you got to do with the levees?"

"I got enough to do! An' there's Bobinôt with Bibi out in that
storm---if he only didn' left Friedheimer's!"

"Let us hope, Calixta, that Bobinôt's got sense enough to come in out of
a cyclone."

She went and stood at the window with a greatly disturbed look on her
face. She wiped the frame that was clouded with moisture. It was
stiflingly hot. Alcée got up and joined her at the window, looking over
her shoulder. The rain was coming down in sheets obscuring the view of
far-off cabins and enveloping the distant wood in a gray mist. The
playing of the lightning was incessant. A bolt struck a tall chinaberry
tree at the edge of the field. It filled all visible space with a
blinding glare and the crash seemed to invade the very boards they stood
upon.

Calixta put her hands to her eyes, and with a cry, staggered backward.
Alcée's arm encircled her, and for an instant he drew her close and
spasmodically to him.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

"Bonté!" she cried, releasing herself from his encircling arm and
retreating from the window, "the house'll go next! If I only knew w'ere
Bibi was!" She would not compose herself; she would not be seated. Alcée
clasped her shoulders and looked into her face. The contact of her warm,
palpitating body when he had unthinkingly drawn her into his arms, had
aroused all the old-time infatuation and desire for her flesh.

"Calixta," he said, "don't be frightened. Nothing can happen. The house
is too low to be struck, with so many tall trees standing about. There!
Aren't you going to be quiet? say, aren't you?" He pushed her hair back
from her face that was warm and steaming. Her lips were as red and moist
as pomegranate seeds. Her white neck and a glimpse of her full, firm
bosom disturbed him powerfully. As she glanced up at him the fear in her
liquid blue eyes had given place to a drowsy gleam that unconsciously
betrayed a sensuous desire. He looked down into her eyes and there was
nothing for him to do but to gather her lips in a kiss. It reminded him
of Assumption.

"Do you remember---in Assumption, Calixta?" he asked in a low voice
broken by passion. Oh! she remembered; for in Assumption he had kissed
her and kissed her; until his senses would well nigh fail, and to save
her he would resort to a desperate flight. If she was not an immaculate
dove in those days, she was still inviolate; a passionate creature whose
very defenselessness had made her defense, against which his honor
forbade him to prevail. Now---well, now---her lips seemed in a manner
free to be tasted, as well as her round, white throat and her whiter
breasts.

They did not heed the crashing torrents, and the roar of the elements
made her laugh as she lay in his arms. She was a revelation in that dim,
mysterious chamber; as white as the couch she lay upon. Her firm,
elastic flesh that was knowing for the first time its birthright, was
like a creamy lily that the sun invites to contribute its breath and
perfume to the undying life of the world. The generous abundance of her
passion, without guile or trickery, was like a white flame which
penetrated and found response in depths of his own sensuous nature that
had never yet been reached.

When he touched her breasts they gave themselves up in quivering
ecstasy, inviting his lips. Her mouth was a fountain of delight. And
when he possessed her, they seemed to swoon together at the very
borderland of life's mystery.

He stayed cushioned upon her, breathless, dazed, enervated, with his
heart beating like a hammer upon her. With one hand she clasped his
head, her lips lightly touching his forehead. The other hand stroked
with a soothing rhythm his muscular shoulders.

The growl of the thunder was distant and passing away. The rain beat
softly upon the shingles, inviting them to drowsiness and sleep. But
they dared not yield.

The rain was over; and the sun was turning the glistening green world
into a palace of gems. Calixta, on the gallery, watched Alcée ride away.
He turned and smiled at her with a beaming face; and she lifted her
pretty chin in the air and laughed aloud.

## III {#sect-00009}

Bobinôt and Bibi, trudging home, stopped without at the cistern to make
themselves presentable.

"My! Bibi, w'at will yo' mama say! You ought to be ashame'. You oughta'
put on those good pants. Look at 'em! An' that mud on yo' collar! How
you got that mud on yo' collar, Bibi? I never saw such a boy!" Bibi was
the picture of pathetic resignation. Bobinôt was the embodiment of
serious solicitude as he strove to remove from his own person and his
son's the signs of their tramp over heavy roads and through wet fields.
He scraped the mud off Bibi's bare legs and feet with a stick and
carefully removed all traces from his heavy brogans. Then, prepared for
the worst---the meeting with an over-scrupulous housewife, they entered
cautiously at the backdoor.

Calixta was preparing supper. She had set the table and was dripping
coffee at the hearth. She sprang up as they came in.

"Oh, Bobinôt! You back! My! but I was uneasy. W'ere you been during the
rain? An' Bibi? he ain't wet? he ain't hurt?" She had clasped Bibi and
was kissing him effusively. Bobinôt's explanations and apologies which
he had been composing all along the way, died on his lips as Calixta
felt him to see if he were dry, and seemed to express nothing but
satisfaction at their safe return.

"I brought you some shrimps, Calixta," offered Bobinôt, hauling the can
from his ample side pocket and laying it on the table.

"Shrimps! Oh, Bobinôt! you too good fo' anything!" and she gave him a
smacking kiss on the cheek that resounded, "*J'vous* *réponds*, we'll
have a feas' to-night! umph-umph!"

Bobinôt and Bibi began to relax and enjoy themselves, and when the three
seated themselves at table they laughed much and so loud that anyone
might have heard them as far away as Laballière's.

## IV {#sect-00010}

Alcée Laballière wrote to his wife, Clarisse, that night. It was a
loving letter, full of tender solicitude. He told her not to hurry back,
but if she and the babies liked it at Biloxi, to stay a month longer. He
was getting on nicely; and though he missed them, he was willing to bear
the separation a while longer---realizing that their health and pleasure
were the first things to be considered.

## V {#sect-00011}

As for Clarisse, she was charmed upon receiving her husband's letter.
She and the babies were doing well. The society was agreeable; many of
her old friends and acquaintances were at the bay. And the first free
breath since her marriage seemed to restore the pleasant liberty of her
maiden days. Devoted as she was to her husband, their intimate conjugal
life was something which she was more than willing to forego for a
while. So the storm passed and everyone was happy.
