m00151

b75c760c-b04d-4d9a-bd73-a7a2fac42216

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Develop a writing project focused on textual analysis.

Complete the stages of the writing process, including generating ideas,
drafting, reviewing, revising, rewriting, and editing.

Integrate the writer's ideas with ideas of others.

Collaborate in the peer review process.

When analyzing a text, writers usually focus on the content of the text
itself and deliberately leave themselves in the background, minimizing
personal presence and bias. To write this way, they avoid first-person
pronouns and value judgments. In reality, of course, writers do reveal
their presence by the choices they make: what they include, what they
exclude, and what they emphasize. Although your own subjectivity and
situation will likely affect your inferences and judgments, recognizing
these potential biases will help you keep the focus on your subject and
off yourself.

# Summary of Assignment {#sect-00002}

Write an analytical essay about a short story or another short text of
your choice, either fiction or literary nonfiction. If desired, you may
choose "The Storm" by Kate Chopin, reprinted above. Consider the
author's form and organization, tone, or stylistic choices, including
diction and sensory or figurative language. You might also consider the
historical or social context, the theme, the character development, or
the relation between setting and plot or characterization. If you are
free to choose your own text and topic, consider the following
approaches:

Analyze the literary components mentioned and focus your essay on their
significance in the work.

Like student author Gwyn Garrison, choose one or several components and
examine how different authors use them and how they relate to broader
contexts.

Convincing textual analysis essays usually include the following
information:

overview of the text, identifying author, title, and genre

very brief summary

description of the text's form and structure

explanation of the author's point of view

summary of the social, historical, or cultural context in which the work
was written

assertion or thesis about what the text means: your main task as an
analyst

When writing about a novel or short story, explain how the main elements
function:

narrator (who tells the story)

plot (what happens in the story)

one or more characters (who are acting or being acted upon)

setting (when and where things are happening)

theme (the meaning of the story)

Keep in mind that the author who writes the story is different from the
narrator and invented characters in it. Keep in mind, too, that what
happens in the story---the plot---is different from the meaning of the
story---the theme. Understanding what happens will help you discover
what the text means.

The [elements](#) of literary or narrative nonfiction are similar to
those of a fictional story *except* that everything in the text is
supposed to have really happened. For this reason, the author and the
narrator of the story may be one and the same. Informational
nonfiction---essays, reports, and textbook chapters---is also meant to
be believed; here, however, ideas and arguments must be strong and well
supported to be convincing. When analyzing nonfiction, pay special
attention to the author's thesis or claim and to how it is supported
through reasoning and evidence. Also note interesting or unusual tone,
style, form, or voice.

Another Lens 1. In writing from a personal or subjective viewpoint, the
writer and their beliefs and experiences are necessarily part of your
analysis and may need to be expressed and examined. For example, you may
write subjectively and compare and contrast your situation with that of
the author or a character. You might explain how your personal
background causes you to read the text in a particular way that is
meaningful to you. If you choose this option, be sure to analyze the
text as you would for a more objective analysis before focusing on your
personal views.

Another Lens 2. A leading contemporary example of narrative nonfiction
writing is Jon Krakauer's (b. 1954) [*Into the Wild*](#), the story of
Chris McCandless (1968-- c. 1992), a young college graduate who lived at
subsistence level in the backwoods of Alaska for 113 days. The text is
somewhat similar thematically to Henry David Thoreau's (1817--1862)
*Walden* (1854), written more than a century earlier and discussed later
in this section. Both are about dropping out of society to create a
meaningful life. After reading the excerpt of *Into the Wild* linked
above, you may choose to write a textual analysis of it either on its
own or in light of the sample analysis of Thoreau's writings later in
this section. Consider comparing and contrasting McCandless's situation
with Thoreau's life in Walden and how Krakauer and Thoreau use various
literary elements in their writing. Topics for analysis might be
setting, character traits, motives, cultural communities, historical
context, and attitudes toward life and society.

# Start with Your Thesis {#sect-00005}

For textual analysis, your thesis should be a clear, concise statement
that identifies your analytical stance on which readers will expect you
to elaborate.

## Develop a working thesis {#sect-00006}

A working thesis is referred to as such because the thesis is subject to
revision. You may have to revisit it later in the writing process, for
it is almost impossible to craft a thesis without having analyzed some
of the text first. Your thesis, therefore, will come from the element(s)
you choose to analyze, such as the following:

an aspect or several aspects of form and structure and their
significance

social, historical, or cultural context in which the text was written
and its significance

style elements such as diction, imagery, or figurative language and
their significance

aspects of characters, plot, or setting

overall theme of a single work or more than one work

comparison or contrast of elements within one or more works

relation to issues outside the text

To develop a working thesis, use the formula shown in [\#](#), basing
your answers on one of the bulleted items listed above.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  *What are you doing? + Why are you doing it?*
  *What are you doing?* Analyzing Kate Chopin's short story "The Storm"
  *+*
  *Why are you doing it?* "To argue that..."
  *=*
  *In the short story "The Storm," author Kate Chopin uses linguistic variety to add to the character development*.
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

You can also start with an analytical question: *For what reason(s) does
Chopin use linguistic variety?* Your initial answer might yield the
thesis above. Or you can ask another analytical question, such as this
one: *In what ways do the plot and setting of "The Storm" reinforce its
theme?*

# Explore Possible Areas of Analysis for Fiction: Approach 1 {#sect-00007}

[Analytical essays](#) begin by answering basic questions: *What genre
is this text---poem, play, story, biography, memoir, essay? What is its
title? Who is the author? When was it published?*

## Identify and Summarize the Text {#sect-00008}

In addition to the basic questions, analytical essays provide a brief
summary of the plot or main idea. Summarize briefly, logically, and
objectively to provide a background for what you plan to say about the
text. This information may be incorporated into the introduction or may
follow it.

## Explain the Form and Organization {#sect-00009}

To analyze the organizational structure of a text, ask: *How is it put
together? Why does the author start here and end there? Why does the
author sequence information in this order? What connects the text from
start to finish?* For example, by repeating words, ideas, and images,
writers call attention to these elements and indicate that they are
important to the meaning of the text. No matter what the text, some
principle or plan holds it together and gives it structure. Fiction and
nonfiction texts that tell stories are often, but not always, organized
as a sequence of events in chronological order. Poems may have formal
structures or other organizational elements. Other texts may alternate
between explanations and examples or between first-person and
third-person narrative. You will have to decide which aspects of the
text's form and organization are most important for your analysis.

For example, this student analyzes the point of view of Gwendolyn
Brooks's poem "[We Real Cool](#).".

Gwendolyn Brooks writes "We Real Cool" (1963) from the point of view of
members of a street gang who speak as one voice. The boys have dropped
out of school to spend their lives hanging around pool halls---in this
case "The Golden Shovel." These guys speak in slangy lingo, such as
"Strike straight," that reveals their need for a melded identity in
their rebellious attitude toward life. The plural speaker in the poem,
"We," celebrates what adults might call adolescent hedonism---but the
speaker, feeling powerful in the group identity, makes a conscious
choice for a short, intense life over a long, safe, and dull existence.

## Place the Work in Context {#sect-00010}

To analyze the context of a text, ask: *What circumstances (historical,
social, political, biographical) produced this text? How does this text
compare or contrast with another by the same author or with a similar
work by a different author?* No text exists in isolation. Each was
created by a particular author in a particular place at a particular
time. Describing this context provides readers with important background
information and indicates which conditions you think were most
influential.

For example, this student analyzes the social context of Gwendolyn
Brooks's poem "We Real Cool."

From society's viewpoint, the boys are nothing but misfits---refusing to
work, leading violent lives, breaking laws, and confronting police.
However, these boys live in a society that is dangerous for Black men,
who often die at the hands of police even when they are doing the right
thing. The boys are hopeless, recognizing no future but death,
regardless of their actions, and thus "Die soon."

## Explain the Theme of the Text {#sect-00011}

To analyze the theme of a text, determine the implied theme in fiction,
poetry, and narrative nonfiction. One purpose for writing a textual
analysis is to point out the theme. Ask yourself: *So what? What is this
text really about? What do I think the author is trying to say by
writing this text? What problems, puzzles, or ideas are most
interesting? In what ways do the characters change between the beginning
and end of the text?* Good ideas for a thesis arise from material in
which the meaning is not obviously stated.

For example, this student analyzes one theme of Gwendolyn Brooks's poem
"We Real Cool."

For the "Seven at the Golden Shovel," companionship is everything. For
many teenagers, fitting in or conforming to a group identity is more
important than developing an individual identity. Brooks expresses this
theme through the poem's point of view, the plural "We" repeated at the
end of each line.

## Analyze Stylistic Choices {#sect-00012}

To analyze stylistic choices, examine the details of the text. Ask
yourself: *Why does the author use this word or phrase instead of a
synonym for it? In what ways does this word or phrase relate to other
words or phrases? In what ways do the author's figurative comparisons
affect the meaning or tone of the text? In what ways does use of sensory
language (imagery) affect the meaning or tone of the text? In what ways
does this element represent more than itself? In what ways does the
author use sound or rhythm to support meaning?*

For example, this student analyzes the diction of Gwendolyn Brooks's
poem "We Real Cool."

Brooks chooses the word *cool* to open the poem and build the first
rhyme. Being cool is the code by which the boys live. However, the word
*cool* also suggests the idiom "to be placed 'on ice,'" a term that
suggests a delay. The boys live in a state of arrested development,
anticipating early deaths. In addition, the term *to ice* someone means
"to kill," another reference to the death imagery at poem's end. The
boys are not suggesting suicide; they expect to be killed by members of
society who find them threatening.

## Support Your Analysis {#sect-00013}

[Analytical interpretations](#) are built around evidence from the text
itself. You'll note the quotations in the examples above. Summarize
larger ideas in your own language to conserve space. Paraphrase more
specific ideas, also in your own words, and quote directly to feature
the author's diction. See [Editing Focus: Paragraphs and Transitions](#)
and [Writing Process: Integrating Research](#) for more information
about summarizing, paraphrasing, and quoting directly. If you include
outside information for support, comparison, or contrast, document the
sources carefully: [MLA Documentation and Format](#).

Use a graphic organizer such as [\#](#) to gather ideas for drafting.

+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| *Genre*              | *Analysis*           | *Your Ideas*         |
+======================+======================+======================+
| If you've chosen to  | Consider the role    | Why does the         |
| analyze poetry,      | of...                | author... ? What is  |
|                      |                      | the effect on        |
|                      | Word choice          | meaning, tone, or    |
|                      | (imagery)            | audience?            |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      | Structure of lines   |                      |
|                      | and stanzas          |                      |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      | Sound (meter, rhyme, |                      |
|                      | rhythm)              |                      |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      | Figurative language  |                      |
|                      | (simile, metaphor,   |                      |
|                      | personification)     |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| If you've chosen to  | Consider the role    | Why does the         |
| analyze drama,       | of...                | author... ? What is  |
|                      |                      | the effect on        |
|                      | Characters and       | meaning, tone, or    |
|                      | dialogue             | audience?            |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      | Setting              |                      |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      | Plot and conflict    |                      |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      | Theme                |                      |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      | Structure of acts,   |                      |
|                      | scenes, and stage    |                      |
|                      | directions           |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| If you've chosen to  | Consider the role    | Why does the         |
| analyze fiction or   | of...                | author... ? What is  |
| narrative            |                      | the effect on        |
| nonfiction,          | Characters (narrator | meaning, tone, or    |
|                      | or author in         | audience?            |
|                      | narrative            |                      |
|                      | nonfiction)          |                      |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      | Setting              |                      |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      | Plot (or real events |                      |
|                      | in narrative         |                      |
|                      | nonfiction) and      |                      |
|                      | conflict             |                      |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      | Theme                |                      |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      | Diction              |                      |
|                      |                      |                      |
|                      | Structure            |                      |
|                      | (chronology,         |                      |
|                      | flashback or         |                      |
|                      | forward,             |                      |
|                      | foreshadowing,       |                      |
|                      | chapters)            |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

: Ideas for drafting a textual analysis essay {#table-00001}

# Explore Possible Areas of Analysis for Literary Nonfiction: Approach 2 {#sect-00014}

Although similar to fiction, narrative or literary nonfiction has a
basic orientation toward exposition: relating real events in a creative
way rather than inventing fictional events and characters. In reading
and analyzing expository prose, you also may encounter literary
language, narrative structure, characters, setting, theme, and plot
development, depending on the type of prose. Therefore, your approach to
analyzing nonfiction will call on many of the same strategies you use to
analyze fiction. Two basic differences, however, are that literary
nonfiction may have less dialogue, depending on the genre, and that the
author and narrator may be the same. In other words, no intermediary or
artistic filter may exist between the author and the work. The
nonfiction author is assumed to be speaking a truth, which may be
serious, comic, controversial, or neutral. Fictional characters, on the
other hand, are creations of an author's mind; they think and speak as
they were created to do.

## Planning the Essay {#sect-00015}

In writing your essay, you will need to present the same kinds of text
evidence as you would when analyzing fiction to give credibility to your
claims and to support your thesis. And you'll need to keep in mind the
rhetorical situation---purpose, audience, stance, context, and
culture---as well, for it remains the building block of an effective
analysis. As in most academic essays, body paragraphs refer to the
thesis through topic sentences and move consistently toward supporting
it before you finally arrive at a convincing conclusion that has grown
out of the analysis. In nonfiction, because you assume you are dealing
with a truthful explanation of facts and views, your task should be to
give a new view and understanding of something that already may be
familiar to readers. In writing your analysis, consider the following
plan:

Begin your analysis of nonfiction with an introductory overview in which
you include the work's genre, title, author, and publication date.

Identify the literary point of view, if relevant: first person---

I

or plural

we

---or third-person---

he, she

, or

they

.

Continue with a brief summary of the work, and place it in context: the
work's social, historical, and cultural background will help readers
follow your points about its theme.

Present your thesis near the end of the introduction. It should be
argumentative, in an academic sense, so that you can "prove" your
points.

Support your thesis with well-elaborated body paragraphs, as you do with
all thesis-based writing. Include paraphrases, summaries, and quotations
from the text (and outside sources, if you do research for the
assignment). Body paragraphs support the topic sentences, which in turn
support the thesis.

Conclude by restating your thesis (using different words and an
appropriate transition). Add a general statement about the work and its
significance or, if applicable, its relation to culture, history,
current events, art, or anything else outside it.

Use the applicable suggestions in [\#](#) in [planning your essay](#):

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| *Title*                                                             |
+==================================+==================================+
| *Introduction*                   | Title(s), author(s), publication |
|                                  | date(s), historical context,     |
|                                  | summary, thesis                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| *Body paragraphs (as many as     | Transition Claims and supporting |
| needed; minimum of 3)*           | evidence: your ideas,            |
|                                  | paraphrases and/or quotations    |
|                                  | from text                        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| *Counterclaim (if any)*          | Addressing opposing or negative  |
|                                  | ideas                            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| *Conclusion*                     | Restatement of thesis, broader   |
|                                  | generalization                   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

: Literary nonfiction planner {#table-00002}

## Literary Nonfiction Model {#sect-00016}

A frequent theme in literary nonfiction is the examination of
alternative ways of living, often solitary and away from society, and
finding truth in individualism and self-sufficiency. Although most
people live in social groups and willingly accept the identity and
security that communities offer, dropping out and going it alone have
long been a part of emotional as well as physical life for some.

You have the option to analyze the nonfiction accounts of writers
exploring solitary human behavior in American life. If you select
*Another Lens 2*, you will read an excerpt from the story of Chris
McCandless (1968--c. 1992), who chose a brief and uncomfortable solitary
existence in Alaska. Or you can read the following section dealing with
the works of Henry David Thoreau, the American philosopher and author
who dropped out of society temporarily, largely because of his strong
opposition to government policies he believed to be morally wrong and
because of his refusal to conform to social practices and expectations
he found objectionable.

## Introduction {#sect-00017}

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Henry David Thoreau (1817--1862) is best known as a thinker and writer
on nature, as reflected in his two famous works, the highly influential
[Civil Disobedience](#) (1849) and *Walden; or, Life in the Woods*
(1854). Both works celebrate individual freedoms: the right to protest
against what one believes is morally or ethically wrong and the choice
to live as one believes. In describing his life over a period of
precisely two years, two months, and two days in a 10-by-15-foot cabin
he built on Walden Pond, 20 miles northwest of Boston near Concord,
Massachusetts, Thoreau wrote:

I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately \[carefully,
unhurried\], to front \[confront\] only the essential facts of life, and
see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and not, when I came to
die, discover that I had not lived. I did not wish to live what was not
life, living is so dear; nor did I wish to practise resignation, unless
it was quite necessary. I wanted to live deep and suck out all the
marrow of life.

Thoreau's insistence on standing by his principles and on living a
simple life by choice are two abiding themes in his work. Even before
the physical move to Walden, Thoreau had refused to pay his poll tax
(granting him the right to vote) for a number of years because he
strongly objected to the government's use of his money to support
enslavement and the war with Mexico. He went peacefully to jail as a
result, until he was bailed out (the next day). In "Civil Disobedience,"
Thoreau advocates for more individual freedom and for individuals to
defy unjust laws in nonviolent ways. His writings on "passive
resistance" inspired the thoughts and actions of influential figures
such as Indian leader Mohandas Gandhi (1869--1948), American religious
and civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr. (1929--1968), and other
leaders of nonviolent liberation movements. In *Walden*, Thoreau
describes and advocates for a simple life in which a person breaks with
society when they feel the need to express their individualism, often
based on ideas others do not share.

These themes are the focus of analysis in the following excerpts from an
essay by student Alex Jones for a first-year composition class.

*The Two Freedoms of Henry David Thoreau by Alex Jones*

Henry David Thoreau led millions of people throughout the world to think
of individual freedom in new ways. During his lifetime he attempted to
live free of unjust governmental restraints as well as conventional
social expectations. In his 1849 political essay "On the Duty of Civil
Disobedience," he makes his strongest case against governmental
interference in the lives of citizens. In his 1854 book *Walden; or Life
in the Woods*, he makes the case for actually living free, as he did in
his own life, from social conventions and expectations.

*The title clearly identifies Thoreau and sets the expectation that two
aspects or definitions of freedom will be discussed in two different
works. Alex Jones wants readers to know that millions of people
worldwide figure in Thoreau's legacy. He gives the examples of "unjust
governmental restraints" and "conventional social expectations" as the
parts of social life Thoreau rejected, thus limiting the scope of the
analysis and preparing for the body of the essay.*

*Jones notes the titles and publication dates of both works and
immediately moves ahead to analyze the two works, "Civil Disobedience"
first. He will show how this political statement leads to the narrative
of* Walden*, the actual story of a man's life in temporary exile.*

Thoreau opens "Civil Disobedience" with his statement "that government
is best which governs not at all."

*The analysis moves immediately to the first work to be discussed and
features the memorable quotation regarding a government that does not
govern. The statement may seem contradictory, but for Thoreau it is a
direct statement in that someone who allows himself to be imprisoned
will find freedom by distancing himself from all others to prove his
point.*

He argues that a government should allow its people to be as free as
possible while providing for their needs without interfering in daily
life. In other words, in daily life a person attends to the business of
eating, sleeping, and earning a living and not dealing in any noticeable
way with an entity called "a government."

*Jones repeats "in daily life" to give a rhythm to his own prose and to
emphasize the importance to Thoreau of daily activities that are simple
and meaningful. The word* government *is repeated for emphasis as the
negative subject of this essay---in literary terms, a powerful and
constant antagonist that constrains and disempowers.*

Because Thoreau did not want his freedom overshadowed by government
regulations, he tried to ignore them. However, the American government
of 1845 would not let him. He was arrested and put in the Concord jail
for failing to pay his poll tax, a tax he believed unjust because it
supported the government's war with Mexico as well as the immoral
institution of slavery. Instead of protesting his arrest, he celebrated
it and explained its meaning by writing "Civil Disobedience," one of the
most famous English-language essays ever written. In it, he argues
persuasively, "Under a government which imprisons any unjustly, the true
place for a just man is also a prison" (230). Thus, the idea of passive
resistance---and accepting unjust arrest to make a point---was formed, a
doctrine that advocated protest against the government by nonviolent
means:

How does it become a man to behave toward this American government
today? I answer that he cannot without disgrace be associated with it. I
cannot for an instant recognize that political organization as my
government which is the slave's government also. (224)

*Jones strengthens his own writing by calling the essay one of the most
famous works ever written. This is not an ordinary technique in textual
analysis, but when done for emphasis, it helps the analysis gain power.
Using "instead of protesting" at the start of his sentence is another
example of strong contrast and linkage.*

For nearly 200 years, Thoreau's formulation of passive resistance has
been a part of the human struggle for freedom. In fact, it changed the
world by inspiring the resistance movements led by Mohandas Gandhi and
Martin Luther King, Jr.

*The total effect is to make Jones's analytical essay more important for
readers, as Thoreau's writings have indeed changed the world despite
being written humbly as the voice of one man's conscience and isolation
in his own freedom.*

Thoreau also wanted to be free from the everyday pressures to conform to
society's expectations.

*Jones transitions from the first short work to the different and
equally famous nonfiction narrative* Walden*, moving smoothly from one
freedom to the next with the transition "also wanted." This second
analysis of freedom is the second part of the essay's thesis.*

He believed in doing and possessing only the essential things in life.
To demonstrate his case, in 1845, he moved to the outskirts of Concord,
Massachusetts, and lived by himself for just over two years in a cabin
he built at Walden Pond. Thoreau wrote *Walden* to explain the value of
living simply, far removed from the unnecessary complexity of society:
"simplicity, simplicity, simplicity! I say, let your affairs be as two
or three, and not a hundred or a thousand" (66). At Walden, he lived as
much as possible by this statement, building his own house and
furniture, growing his own food, bartering for simple necessities, and
attending to his own business rather than seeking employment from
others.

*Jones uses textual evidence to support his claim. He summarizes
Thoreau's activities at Walden and quotes Thoreau as evidence to
reinforce the freedom of mind that simple living allows.*

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Living at Walden Pond gave Thoreau the chance to formulate many of his
ideas about living an unencumbered, economical life. At Walden, he lived
simply to "front only the essential facts of life" (66) and to center
his thoughts on "living" instead of on unnecessary details of mere
livelihood. He developed survival skills that freed him from the
constraints of city dwellers whose lives depended upon a web of material
things and services provided by others. He preferred to "take rank hold
on life and spend my day more as animals do" (117).

*Jones uses the poetic language of high rhetoric directly from Thoreau.
The body of the essay gives specific evidence of how Thoreau ate, built,
read, and provided for his needs, cutting away all but the essential man
in the two settings of his life.*

While living at Walden Pond, Thoreau was free to occupy his time in any
way that pleased him, which for him meant mostly writing and tending his
bean patch. The details of his gardening appear frequently, as he
concentrated on it during his time there. He wasn't troubled by a boss
hounding him with deadlines or a wife and children who needed his
attention. His neighbors accused him of being selfish and did not
understand that he sought most of all "to live deliberately" (66), as he
felt all people should learn to do.

Then, as now, most people had more responsibilities than Thoreau had and
could not just pack up their belongings and go live in the woods---if
they could find free woods to live in. Today, people are intrigued to
read about Thoreau's experiences and are inspired by his thoughts, but
few people can actually live or do as he suggests. The idea of life
without cell phones or Internet seems inconceivable, even if one grows
one's own food and lives mostly off the grid.

*The next-to-last paragraph recognizes what could be a counterclaim: not
everyone in contemporary times would view living alone for two years as
a pleasure. Rather, they might see it as a different kind of prison,
perhaps even a dangerous one. Indeed, such deprivation has less appeal
these days, and people who do go off by themselves may be seen to have
questionable motives.*

The theme of exploring how a man lives in or outside governmental
control is clear in the choices he must make to define himself as a free
person. Nevertheless, practical or not, Thoreau's writings about freedom
from government and society have inspired countless people to reassess
how they live their lives. Though unable to live as Thoreau advocated,
readers everywhere remain inspired by his ideals and his belief in the
two freedoms.

*Jones concludes by emphasizing the strength of Thoreau's ideas---his
two freedoms---and the influence they have had in the world.*

## Review the Essay {#sect-00018}

After reading Alex Jones's essay, complete the following sentences to
review his work:

He identifies and summarizes the content by \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

He describes the form and structure of Thoreau's works when
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

He places Thoreau and his works in context by \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

He clearly states his own theme in reading Thoreau, which is
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

He indicates Thoreau's unusual language at times, such as
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

He gives supporting evidence for his points, such as \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

He includes a visual to \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

He concludes with a balanced and convincing viewpoint by
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

# For Reference: excerpt from *[Walden](#)* by Henry David Thoreau *from* "Where I Lived and What I Lived For" {#sect-00019}

When first I took up my abode in the woods, that is, began to spend my
nights as well as days there, which, by accident, was on Independence
Day, or the Fourth of July, 1845, my house was not finished for winter,
but was merely a defense against the rain, without plastering or
chimney, the walls being of rough, weather-stained boards, with wide
chinks, which made it cool at night. The upright white hewn studs and
freshly planed door and window casings gave it a clean and airy look,
especially in the morning, when its timbers were saturated with dew, so
that I fancied that by noon some sweet gum would exude from them. To my
imagination it retained throughout the day more or less of this auroral
character, reminding me of a certain house on a mountain which I had
visited the year before. This was an airy and unplastered cabin, fit to
entertain a travelling god, and where a goddess might trail her
garments. The winds which passed over my dwelling were such as sweep
over the ridges of mountains, bearing the broken strains, or celestial
parts only, of terrestrial music....

The only house I had been the owner of before, if I except a boat, was a
tent, which I used occasionally when making excursions in the summer,
and this is still rolled up in my garret; but the boat, after passing
from hand to hand, has gone down the stream of time. With this more
substantial shelter about me, I had made some progress toward settling
in the world. This frame, so slightly clad, was a sort of
crystallization around me, and reacted on the builder. It was suggestive
somewhat as a picture in outlines. I did not need to go outdoors to take
the air, for the atmosphere within had lost none of its freshness. It
was not so much within doors as behind a door where I sat, even in the
rainiest weather. The Harivansa \[important Sanskrit text\] says, "An
abode without birds is like a meat without seasoning." Such was not my
abode, for I found myself suddenly neighbor to the birds; not by having
imprisoned one, but having caged myself near them....

For the first week, whenever I looked out on the pond it impressed me
like a tarn high up on the side of a mountain, its bottom far above the
surface of other lakes, and, as the sun arose, I saw it throwing off its
nightly clothing of mist, and here and there, by degrees, its soft
ripples or its smooth reflecting surface was revealed, while the mists,
like ghosts, were stealthily withdrawing in every direction into the
woods, as at the breaking up of some nocturnal conventicle. The very dew
seemed to hang upon the trees later into the day than usual, as on the
sides of mountains.

This small lake was of most value as a neighbor in the intervals of a
gentle rain storm in August, when, both air and water being perfectly
still, but the sky overcast, mid-afternoon had all the serenity of
evening, and the wood-thrush sang around, and was heard from shore to
shore. A lake like this is never smoother than at such a time; and the
clear portion of the air above it being shallow and darkened by clouds,
the water, full of light and reflections, becomes a lower heaven itself
so much the more important. From a hill top nearby, where the wood had
been recently cut off, there was a pleasing vista southward across the
pond, through a wide indentation in the hills which form the shore
there, where their opposite sides sloping toward each other suggested a
stream flowing out in that direction through a wooded valley, but stream
there was none. That way I looked between and over the near green hills
to some distant and higher ones in the horizon, tinged with blue.
Indeed, by standing on tiptoe I could catch a glimpse of some of the
peaks of the still bluer and more distant mountain ranges in the
north-west, those true-blue coins from heaven's own mint, and also of
some portion of the village. But in other directions, even from this
point, I could not see over or beyond the woods which surrounded me. It
is well to have some water in your neighborhood, to give buoyancy to and
float the earth. One value even of the smallest well is, that when you
look into it you see that earth is not continent but insular. This is as
important as that it keeps butter cool. When I looked across the pond
from this peak toward the Sudbury meadows, which in time of flood I
distinguished elevated perhaps by a mirage in their seething valley,
like a coin in a basin, all the earth beyond the pond appeared like a
thin crust insulated and floated even by this small sheet of
interverting water, and I was reminded that this on which I dwelt was
but *dry land*.

We must learn to reawaken and keep ourselves awake, not by mechanical
aids, but by an infinite expectation of the dawn, which does not forsake
us in our soundest sleep. I know of no more encouraging fact than the
unquestionable ability of man to elevate his life by a conscious
endeavor. It is something to be able to paint a particular picture, or
to carve a statue, and so to make a few objects beautiful; but it is far
more glorious to carve and paint the very atmosphere and medium through
which we look, which morally we can do. To affect the quality of the
day, that is the highest of arts. Every man is tasked to make his life,
even in its details, worthy of the contemplation of his most elevated
and critical hour. If we refused, or rather used up, such paltry
information as we get, the oracles would distinctly inform us how this
might be done.

I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front only
the essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to
teach, and not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived. I did
not wish to live what was not life, living is so dear; nor did I wish to
practise resignation, unless it was quite necessary. I wanted to live
deep and suck out all the marrow of life, to live so sturdily and
Spartan-like as to put to rout all that was not life, to cut a broad
swath and shave close, to drive life into a corner, and reduce it to its
lowest terms, and, if it proved to be mean, why then to get the whole
and genuine meanness of it, and publish its meanness to the world; or if
it were sublime, to know it by experience, and be able to give a true
account of it in my next excursion. For most men, it appears to me, are
in a strange uncertainty about it, whether it is of the devil or of God,
and have *somewhat hastily* concluded that it is the chief end of man
here to "glorify God and enjoy him forever."

Still we live meanly, like ants; though the fable tells us that we were
long ago changed into men; like pygmies we fight with cranes; it is
error upon error, and clout upon clout, and our best virtue has for its
occasion a superfluous and evitable wretchedness. Our life is frittered
away by detail. An honest man has hardly need to count more than his ten
fingers, or in extreme cases he may add his ten toes, and lump the rest.
Simplicity, simplicity, simplicity! I say, let your affairs be as two or
three, and not a hundred or a thousand; instead of a million count half
a dozen, and keep your accounts on your thumb nail. In the midst of this
chopping sea of civilized life, such are the clouds and storms and
quicksands and thousand-and-one items to be allowed for, that a man has
to live, if he would not founder and go to the bottom and not make his
port at all, by dead reckoning, and he must be a great calculator indeed
who succeeds. Simplify, simplify. Instead of three meals a day, if it be
necessary eat but one; instead of a hundred dishes...

Why should we live with such... waste of life? We are determined to be
starved before we are hungry. Men say that a stitch in time saves nine,
and so they take a thousand stitches to-day to save nine to-morrow.

#  {#sect-00020}

After you have completed your first draft, exchange essays with a
partner for peer review. Look at the questions you answered to address
the essay about Thoreau. Then, to provide helpful feedback, answer these
questions about your peer's draft.

Does the introduction include the author, title of the work, publication
date, historical context, and a brief summary?

What is your peer's main claim, or thesis? Is it clearly stated? If not,
how might your peer clarify it?

Is the thesis effectively supported throughout the essay? How does each
paragraph support the thesis? What evidence does each contain? Has the
writer included direct quotations, paraphrases, and summary as relevant
and convincing support? Is there enough information to sustain the
writer's claims? How might the author improve their support? In working
on this section, go through each body paragraph separately for these
criteria.

Does the analysis address counterclaims? If not, how might the writer
include them?

Which sentence or sentences restate the thesis? If a restatement is not
there, what might the writer include?

#  {#sect-00021}

Once you have feedback from a peer, consider their suggestions. Read all
comments, and think carefully before making changes.

Use your discretion

. Sometimes writers do not agree with their peers' suggestions; indeed,
authors do not always revise everything suggested by editors. However,
it is important to clarify what might have prompted a response from a
peer, such as "This seems like more of an unsupported opinion than
text-based evidence." Here you might consider including a source
citation either from the text or from an outside resource, or consider
further explaining your claim. However, if you think your peer reviewer
misinterpreted or read your claim superficially, do not revise it. At
all times, though, maintain ownership. It is your paper; you are the
ultimate judge of whether the ideas in it represent you and your views.
Never include someone else's idea in your paper if you do not understand
it or believe it. Whether or not you decide to revise, be sure to read
and consider all suggestions carefully.

Focus on global suggestions first.

Global feedback applies to your entire paper. You may have to revise
your topic or thesis so that your paper meets assigned guidelines or
does what it should. It is important to revise global feedback first,
for these revisions might necessitate changes in content and
organization, among other things.

Complete a close revision.

Check your paper to revise for clarity at the sentence level, and
double-check citations, if you have them, for accuracy and style.

In Chapter 16, you have learned about the revision process, including
how to evaluate suggestions for revision from peer review. In this
activity, evaluate each revision suggestion for specificity. A specific
suggestion is helpful and easy to implement. A general suggestion is not
helpful and should be ignored unless you can go back and ask the
reviewer to provide more details. Based on your evaluation, look at each
revision suggestion and decide whether to implement or to ignore.

## Student Revision Model {#sect-00022}

Below is a paragraph from the first draft of Gwyn Garrison's paper. It
was reviewed by a peer, who made the suggestions indicated. First, read
the draft. Next, read the reviewer's suggestions and consider whether
you would accept or reject each one. Then, read the paragraph as it
appears in the final version. After each suggestion, consider why you
think Gwyn Garrison accepted or rejected the reviewer's comment.

## Original Draft {#sect-00023}

When Calixta acts outside of societal norms, she discovers the freedom
of self-expression and passion. Chopin's diction evokes a spiritual
transcendence that allows Calixta to exist momentarily outside social
norms that exist only in the physical plane of existence: "when he
possessed her, they seemed to swoon at the very borderland of life's
mystery." The affair becomes a vehicle that allows Calixta to get to a
place of true self-expression. The storm, an aspect of nature or the
natural world, acts as the catalyst in Calixta's natural
self-realization of womanhood. The storm breaks externally and
internally for Calixta. Chopin's depiction of Calixta's sexual
liberation and fulfillment outside of her marriage is an early step in
the fight to bridge the gap between women's bodies and their
sociopolitical lives. By presenting female sexuality in a way that is
enlightening rather than degrading, Chopin helps destigmatize labels
such as *whore,* which have been used to shame women for acting outside
of traditional gender expectations.

# Peer Reviewer's Comments {#sect-00024}

A transition would help link this paragraph with the previous one.

At the beginning of the paragraph, after the first sentence, add a short
description or explanation of what is happening in the scene.

The quotation from the text doesn't help explain your claim. Anyway, you
left out a word.

Perhaps you could add a quotation about the storm.

Can you clarify the relationship between the storm and Calixta's
self-realization?

# Final Version {#sect-00025}

When Calixta acts outside of societal norms, *however*, she discovers
the freedom of self-expression and passion. *All of the parts of her
womanhood that have no place in the society in which she lives have been
repressed until this one moment. In this scene, Chopin takes possession
of the term *whore* and redefines Calixta's behavior as a transformative
awakening.* Chopin's diction evokes a spiritual transcendence that
allows Calixta to exist momentarily outside social norms that exist only
in the physical plane of existence: "when he possessed her, they seemed
to swoon together at the very borderland of life's mystery." The affair
becomes a vehicle that allows Calixta to get to a place of true
self-expression. The storm, an aspect of nature or the natural world,
acts as the catalyst in Calixta's natural self-realization of womanhood.
As the storm breaks externally, it also breaks internally for Calixta.
Chopin's depiction of Calixta's sexual liberation and fulfillment
outside of her marriage is an early step in the fight to bridge the gap
between women's bodies and their sociopolitical lives. By presenting
female sexuality in a way that is enlightening rather than degrading,
Chopin helps destigmatize labels such as *whore,* which have been used
to shame women for acting outside of traditional gender expectations.
