m00155

13634b2e-60e6-4fd6-b1a2-721310b88fe3

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Reflect on the development of composing processes and how those
processes affect your work.

Identify your strengths in writing and consider how to continue to
develop your writing process.

# Reflective Writing: Genres of Reflective Writing {#sect-00002}

Reflective writing is not limited to a single genre. Because it is
highly personal, it is most frequent in, but certainly not limited to,
diaries, journals, autobiographies, and memoirs. One common way that it
appears is in letters or essays that writers craft to reflect on, or
think about, their writing process for a particular text they have
written. Consider the following suggestions when you write reflectively
about this assignment for your ongoing portfolio compilation:

Write this letter, essay, or response as you would to a friend---be kind
to yourself and your process, but be realistic as well.

Highlight what you think are your present capabilities and what you
would like to strengthen.

Specifically discuss and illustrate---by giving specific examples---how
well you have met the assignment objectives listed under

Evaluation: Self-Directed Assessment

.

To guide your portfolio reflection, answer these questions:

What did you learn about yourself and/or the writing process in the
course of writing your textual analysis?

What did you learn about the topic and/or about writing in general?

Which part of the writing process was most beneficial to you: drafting,
peer review, conferences, or something else?

How successfully did you address the assignment guidelines?

How might you change your writing process to better support your growth
as a writer---for example, time management, change in drafting methods,
more focus on rubric, extended research, more focus on the final draft
before submission?

# Further Reading {#sect-00003}

George, Diana. "Changing the Face of Poverty: Nonprofits and the Problem
of Representation." *Popular Literacy: Studies in Cultural Practices and
Poetics*, edited by John Trimbur, University of Pittsburgh Press, 2001.

Gill, Isabelle. "Feminist Figures or Damsels in Distress? The Media's
Gendered Misrepresentation of Disney Princesses." *Young Scholars in
Writing*, vol. 13, 2016,
youngscholarsinwriting.org/index.php/ysiw/article/view/230/230.

"Rhetorical Analysis of 'Fish Cheeks' by Amy Tan." *Bartleby Research*.
www.bartleby.com/essay/Rhetorical-Analysis-Of-Fish-Cheeks-PY2JSYU9ZW6

Safire, William. "A Spirit Reborn." *New York Times*, 9 Sept. 2002,
www.nytimes.com/2002/09/09/opinion/a-spirit-reborn.html.

Smith, Steven B. "Empowering Word." *New York Times*, 2 July 2014,
www.nytimes.com/2014/07/06/books/review/our-declaration-by-danielle-allen.html

# Works Cited {#sect-00004}

Chopin, Kate. "The Storm." 1898. *American Literature.com*, 2018,
americanliterature.com/author/kate-chopin/short-story/the-storm.

hooks, bell. *Rapture Remembered: The Writer at Work*. Holt Paperbacks,
1999.

Krakauer, Jon. *Into the Wild*. Anchor Books, 1997.

Onori, P. J. "In Defense of Hard: When Easier Isn't Better."
*Lifehacker*, 12 May 2011,
lifehacker.com/5800882/in-defense-of-hard-why-easy-isnt-always-the-best-answer.
Accessed 12 Jan. 2019.

Smitherman, Geneva, and Victor Villanueva, editors. *Language Diversity
in the Classroom: From Intention to Practice.* Southern Illinois UP,
2003.

"Students' Right to Their Own Language." *College Composition and
Communication*, vol. 25, 1974,
www.ncte.org/library/NCTEFiles/Groups/CCCC/NewSRTOL.pdf.

Thoreau, Henry David. *Walden* and "On the Duty of Civil Disobedience."
1854; 1894. E-book, *Project Gutenberg*, 1995,
www.gutenberg.org/files/205/205-h/205-h.htm.

Wallace, David L. "Alternative Rhetoric and Morality: Writing from the
Margins." *College Composition and Communication*, vol. 61, no. 2, 2009,
pp. 18-39.
http://www.ncte.org/library/NCTEFiles/Resources/Journals/CCC/0612-dec09/CCC0612Alternative.pdf.
