m00099

0ffc6e4e-f20d-434d-8a65-64804ceab80a

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Apply key rhetorical concepts in presenting a position argument.

Articulate how position and argument conventions are shaped by purpose,
culture, and reasoning.

In writing, a genre is a category of literary composition. The genre for
this chapter is a position arguments. In a position argument, your
purpose is to present a perspective, or viewpoint, about a debatable
issue and persuade readers that your perspective is correct or at least
worthy of serious consideration. A debatable issue is one that is
subject to uncertainty or to a difference of opinion; in college
classes, a debatable issue is one that is complex and involves critical
thinking. These issues are not rooted in absolutes; instead, they invite
writers to explore all sides to discover the position they support. In
examining and explaining their positions, writers provide reasoning and
evidence about why their stance is correct.

Many people may interpret the word *argument* to mean a heated
disagreement or quarrel. However, this is only one definition. In
writing, *argument*---what Aristotle called *rhetoric*---means "working
with a set of reasons and evidence for the purpose of persuading readers
that a particular position is not only valid but also worthy of their
support." This approach is the basis of academic position writing.

Your instructor likely will require your position argument to include
these elements, which resemble those of Aristotle's classical argument.
However, as you continue the development of your writing identity
throughout this course, consider ways in which you want to support these
conventions or challenge them for rhetorical purposes.

Introduce the issue and your position on the issue.

Explain and describe the issue.

Address the opposition.

Provide evidence to support your position.

Offer your conclusion.

Position arguments must provide reasoning and evidence to support the
validity of the author's viewpoint. By offering strong support, writers
seek to persuade their audiences to understand, accept, agree with, or
take action regarding their viewpoints. In a college class, an audience
is usually an instructor and other classmates. Outside of an academic
setting, however, an audience includes anyone who might read the
argument---employers, employees, colleagues, neighbors, and people of
different ages or backgrounds or with different interests.

Before you think about writing, keep in mind that presenting a position
is already part of your everyday life. You present reasoning to frame
evidence that supports your opinions, whether you are persuading a
friend to go to a certain restaurant, or persuading your supervisor to
change your work schedule. Your reasoning and evidence emphasize the
importance of the issue---to you. Position arguments are also valuable
outside of academia. Opinion pieces and letters to the editor are
essentially brief position texts that express writers' viewpoints on
current events topics. Moreover, government organizations and political
campaigns often use position arguments to present detailed views of one
side of a debatable issue.

On a larger scale, arguing in favor of a position is deeply rooted in
the American political and social systems, in which free speech and, by
extension, open debate are the essence of the democratic process. They
are also at the heart of the academic process, in which scholars
investigate issues dealing with science, society, and culture, or shared
values, customs, arts, and other traits of any social group. However, in
the academic world, unlike the political and legal worlds, posing
position arguments is usually less about winning or losing than about
changing minds, altering perceptions, or defending beliefs and ideas.

It is most useful to look at a position argument as rational
disagreement rather than as a quarrel or contest. Rational disagreements
occur most often in areas of genuine uncertainty about what is right,
best, or most reasonable. In disciplines such as literature and history,
position arguments commonly take the form of interpretation or analysis,
in which the meaning of an idea or text is disputed. In disciplines such
as engineering and business, position arguments commonly examine a
problem and propose a solution. For example, a position paper in
engineering might focus on improvement recommendations for systems in
the oil and gas industry; a position paper in business might focus on
technological changes that would benefit a particular company or
industry.

In college, position arguments aim to persuade readers to agree with a
particular viewpoint. Assignments commonly require you to take a stance
on an issue and defend your position against attacks from skeptics or
naysayers. You are asked to choose an issue, present a viewpoint about
it, and support it with reasoning and evidence. Remember these basic
points:

Choose a debatable issue.

A position argument that states, for instance, that

three-year-old children can be left alone all evening

is one with no room for debate, so the topic would not lead to an
effective argument. Without a debate, there is no argument.

Present a clear, definite viewpoint.

Readers do not want to guess your position. Although you present both
sides of a position, readers must be clear about which side you support.

Support your viewpoint with reasoning and evidence.

If, for instance, you are writing about backing a local proposal to
remove a statute of a Civil War general who fought for the Confederacy,
readers need to know why you favor its removal, why the statue was first
erected, and how removal will help the community. You would then support
each with cause-and-effect reasoning and evidence. For example, details
that explain why you favor removal might include the general's support
of the Southern economic system sustained by enslavement. Details that
explain why the statue was erected might include that the general was
from the town and that his family was rich and influential enough to
fund the creation and placement of the statue. Details that explain how
the removal of the statue will affect the community might include the
promotion of a feeling of solidarity with local citizens of all races
and the end of negative publicity resulting from association with the
general.

Identify counterclaims (dissenting opinions).

When you address differing or contradictory opinions, show

empathy

, the ability to understand and share the feelings of others, for those
with dissenting views. If, for instance, people oppose a proposed new
law because they think it will cost too much money, then explain why the
money will be well spent or offset by savings in the future. Neither
antagonize nor dismiss the opposition.
