m00100

56820452-e31a-4304-9e0d-8d228aa364e4

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Demonstrate critical thinking when reading in varying rhetorical and
cultural contexts.

Articulate and analyze rhetorical and cultural contexts in reading.

Distinguish relationships between the interplay of verbal and nonverbal
elements, and explain how these features function for different
audiences and situations.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

"I . . . us\[e\] visual evidence . . . charts and maps and diagrams to
support my positions."
::::

# Trendsetter {#sect-00002}

Trendsetting journalist Charles Blow (b. 1970) attended Grambling State
University in Louisiana, where he edited his college newspaper, founded
a student magazine, and interned (worked as a trainee to gain
experience) in various positions. While a student, he heard *The New
York Times* was participating in a job conference in Atlanta and decided
to attend. When he arrived, however, he learned he was supposed to have
preregistered, paid a fee, filled out a form, and submitted an essay.
Undeterred, Blow borrowed pencil from a guard, completed the form, paid
the fee, and wrote the essay on the spot. He then gained entry into the
conference. When he got to the booth sponsored by *The New York Times*,
he was told he would not be interviewed because he had not signed up
beforehand. Again undeterred, Blow decided to wait anyway, thinking
someone who had signed up might not appear for their interview. He
waited until early evening and eventually was granted an interview. At
the end of his interview, he was told that he had been impressive but
that *The New York Times* had no openings at the time. The next day,
however, a representative from the paper approached him again and
announced they had created an internship for him.

In 1991, Blow graduated *magna cum laude* (with great distinction) with
a degree in mass communications and began a journalism career, working
in various cities. In 2008, he returned to *The New York Times* as its
first "visual" op-ed columnist, writing opinion pieces that feature
graphic aids such as diagrams, charts, and tables. In his visual op-ed
column, Blow presents his position or argument, with the intent to
persuade readers to agree with him. To augment what he says in print, he
includes graphic aids, which clarify and simplify data. Blow is
cautious, too, about using visuals that are too complex, for he believes
his readers respond better to "a strong point . . . in a visual nugget
that they can digest right away."

Blow's topics revolve around current events, and his readers---his
audience---expect his columns to highlight his positions on, or
arguments about, hot-button issues in current events. Blow calls himself
a "trend spotter," someone on the cutting edge of what is happening in
the nation and the world. To discover ideas for topics about current
events, Blow keeps his office television tuned to news channels so he
can learn of breaking news or of how news is being covered. That is
where his writing process usually begins.

First, when an interesting news item comes over the airwaves, Blow
decides his opinion on the subject. Then he thinks about whether his
readers might care about the subject. He does not stop there, though.
Because Blow is a visual op-ed columnist, he will not pursue the topic
if he cannot think of a visual hook to support his position or argument.
He then studies data about the topic and asks himself whether the data
surprises him or might surprise readers. His audience expects solid
graphic aids in his columns, and it is the combination of written prose
and visual hooks that makes him stand apart from other op-ed writers.

In addition to writing for *The New York Times*, Blow is the author of
the memoir *Fire Shut Up in My Bones* and *The Devil You Know: A Black
Power Manifesto*.

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00003}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
