m00102

6b686fe5-9108-4574-b104-0230d02a9b6d

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Demonstrate critical thinking about a reading passage related to
position and argument writing.

Explain and evaluate how conventions are shaped by purpose, language,
culture, and expectation.

Assess material for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and
communicating in various rhetorical and cultural contexts.

# Introduction {#sect-00002}

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

In a commencement speech at the [University of Michigan](#) on May 22,
1964, President [Lyndon B. Johnson](#) proposed a set of domestic
programs that would become one of the foundations of his administration.
He called these programs the Great Society. Today, many of the same
problems that Johnson addressed continue, and programs that seek to
remedy them are referred to as initiatives of social justice, such as
those directed toward human rights, health care, alleviating poverty,
and guaranteeing democratic practices. To persuade his audience to agree
that the programs needed to be adopted, Johnson presented his argument
about why they were needed and what they would achieve.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

# Testing Our Success as a Nation {#sect-00003}

President Hatcher, Governor Romney, Senators McNamara and Hart,
Congressmen Meader and Staebler and other members of the fine Michigan
delegation, members of the graduating class, my fellow Americans:

Audience. *This speech, although given at the University of Michigan
commencement, is addressed to the nation. Johnson first mentions the
people in attendance but ends his introduction by including in his wider
audience: "my fellow Americans."*

It is a great pleasure to be here today. This university has been
coeducational since 1870, but I do not believe it was on the basis of
your accomplishments that a Detroit high school girl said, "In choosing
a college, you first have to decide whether you want a coeducational
school or an educational school." Well, we can find both here at
Michigan, although perhaps at different hours. I came out here today
very anxious to meet the Michigan student whose father told a friend of
mine that his son's education had been a real value. It stopped his
mother from bragging about him.

I have come today from the turmoil of your Capital to the tranquility of
your campus to speak about the future of your country. The purpose of
protecting the life of our Nation and preserving the liberty of our
citizens is to pursue the happiness of our people. Our success in that
pursuit is the test of our success as a Nation. For a century we labored
to settle and to subdue a continent. For half a century we called upon
unbounded invention and untiring industry to create an order of plenty
for all of our people. The challenge of the next half century is whether
we have the wisdom to use that wealth to enrich and elevate our national
life and to advance the quality of our American civilization.

Kairos. *Johnson notes the mood of the nation and of the campus, a
timely reference for those attending the graduation ceremony.*

Context. *Johnson contextualizes the current challenges of the country
within the history of the nation. This strategy calls upon the
patriotism of his audience to take their rightful place in history.*

Your imagination, your initiative, and your indignation will determine
whether we build a society where progress is the servant of our needs or
a society where old values and new visions are buried under unbridled
growth. For in your time we have the opportunity to move not only toward
the rich society and the powerful society, but upward to the Great
Society.

Purpose. *Johnson's purpose is to introduce the concept of the Great
Society to the American public.*

The Great Society rests on abundance and liberty for all. It demands an
end to poverty and racial injustice, to which we are totally committed
in our time. But that is just the beginning. The Great Society is a
place where every child can find knowledge to enrich his mind and to
enlarge his talents.

It is a place where leisure is a welcome chance to build and reflect,
not a feared cause of boredom and restlessness. It is a place where the
city of man serves not only the needs of the body and the demands of
commerce but the desire for beauty and the hunger for community. It is a
place where man can renew contact with nature. It is a place which
honors creation for its own sake and for what it adds to the
understanding of the race. It is a place where men are more concerned
with the quality of their goals than the quantity of their goods.

Repetition. *Johnson repeats the clause "It is a place" to add emphasis
to the various facets of the Great Society.*

Definition. *Johnson also defines for the audience what he means by the
term* Great Society.

Allusion. *Johnson mentions "the city of man," a reference---or
allusion---to St. Augustine's book* The City of God, *which gives
ethical and religious significance to his Great Society.*

But most of all, the Great Society is not a safe harbor, a resting
place, a final objective, a finished work. It is a challenge constantly
renewed, beckoning us toward a destiny where the meaning of our lives
matches the marvelous products of our labor.

So I want to talk to you today about three places where we begin to
build the Great Society---in our cities, in our countryside, and in our
classrooms.

Clear Viewpoint. *Johnson states that America needs reform and points
out the three areas where the Great Society will focus: "in our cities,
in our countryside, and in our classrooms." His choice of these places
emphasizes where people live and where they learn.*

Many of you will live to see the day, perhaps 50 years from now, when
there will be 400 million Americans, four-fifths of them in urban areas.
In the remainder of this century urban population will double, city land
will double, and we will have to build homes, highways, and facilities
equal to all those built since this country was first settled. So in the
next 40 years we must rebuild the entire urban United States.

Kairos. *Johnson addresses the timeliness of the concerns these college
graduates have about their lives after graduation.*

Logos. *Johnson will go on to provide a logical solution to the problems
that Americans will face over the next 40 years.*

Aristotle said: "Men come together in cities in order to live, but they
remain together in order to live the good life." It is harder and harder
to live the good life in American cities today.

Quotation from an Expert. *This quotation from a revered classical
philosopher (Aristotle) echoes Johnson's idea, giving it more strength
and credibility.*

The catalog of ills is long: there is the decay of the centers and the
despoiling of the suburbs. There is not enough housing for our people or
transportation for our traffic. Open land is vanishing, and old
landmarks are violated. Worst of all, expansion is eroding the precious
and time-honored values of community with neighbors and communion with
nature. The loss of these values breeds loneliness and boredom and
indifference.

Kairos. *Johnson addresses the many concerns on Americans' minds.*

Pathos. *Using strong words like* decay*,* despoiling, vanishing, *and*
violated*,* *Johnson connects his argument to emotions---mostly
fear---the audience would feel about such destruction of nature and
values.*

Culture. *Johnson addresses the need for a change in culture to improve
the future of the country.*

Our society will never be great until our cities are great. Today the
frontier of imagination and innovation is inside those cities and not
beyond their borders.

Supporting Evidence. *Johnson states that he will begin to build the
Great Society in three places---cities, countryside, classrooms. Then he
gives supporting evidence for each place.*

*To support the need for change the Great Society will bring to cities,
Johnson offers that*

*many people in the audience will see a time when four-fifths of the
American population will live in cities;*

*since urban population and city land will double in the coming years,
America needs homes, highways, and facilities;*

*cities suffer from decay, and suburbs are being despoiled;*

*the country must fulfill housing and transportation needs;*

*open land is vanishing;*

*old landmarks are violated; and*

*values of community and communion with nature are eroding.*

New experiments are already going on. It will be the task of your
generation to make the American city a place where future generations
will come, not only to live but to live the good life. I understand that
if I stayed here tonight, I would see that Michigan students are really
doing their best to live the good life. This is the place where the
Peace Corps was started. It is inspiring to see how all of you, while
you are in this country, are trying so hard to live at the level of the
people.

A second place where we begin to build the Great Society is in our
countryside. We have always prided ourselves on being not only America
the strong and America the free, but America the beautiful. Today that
beauty is in danger. The water we drink, the food we eat, the very air
that we breathe, are threatened with pollution. Our parks are
overcrowded, our seashores overburdened. Green fields and dense forests
are disappearing.

Transition between Paragraphs. *By using the phrase "second place,"
Johnson alerts his audience that he is shifting to another facet of the
Great Society.*

Pathos. *Johnson appeals to the fears of his audience with examples of
the tragedies that could result if the Great Society were not adopted.*

Supporting Evidence. *To support the need for change the Great Society
will bring to the countryside, Johnson offers that*

*the beauty of America is in danger;*

*pollution threatens water, food, and air;*

*parks are overcrowded and seashores are overburdened;*

*green fields and dense forests are disappearing; and*

*if destroyed, natural splendor cannot be recaptured.*

A few years ago, we were greatly concerned about the "Ugly American."
Today we must act to prevent an ugly America. For once the battle is
lost, once our natural splendor is destroyed, it can never be
recaptured. And once man can no longer walk with beauty or wonder at
nature his spirit will wither and his sustenance be wasted.

Allusion and Play on Words. *Johnson alludes to a phrase in popular use
that describes U.S. citizens as "ugly Americans": brash, conceited, and
ignorant about cultures of other societies and matters of the world. He
connects the phrase* Ugly American *with the phrase "ugly America," a
play on how Americans are perceived with his desire that America not be
perceived as "ugly America."*

A third place to build the Great Society is in the classrooms of
America. There your children's lives will be shaped. Our society will
not be great until every young mind is set free to scan the farthest
reaches of thought and imagination. We are still far from that goal.

Transition between Paragraphs. *With the phrase "third place," Johnson
alerts his audience that he is shifting to the third facet of the Great
Society.*

Today, eight million adult Americans, more than the entire population of
Michigan, have not finished five years of school. Nearly 20 million have
not finished eight years of school. Nearly 54 million---more than
one-quarter of all America---have not even finished high school.

Each year more than 100,000 high school graduates, with proved ability,
do not enter college because they cannot afford it. And if we cannot
educate today's youth, what will we do in 1970 when elementary school
enrollment will be five million greater than 1960? And high school
enrollment will rise by five million. College enrollment will increase
by more than three million.

In many places, classrooms are overcrowded and curricula are outdated.

Statistics as Supporting Evidence. *To support the need for change the
Great Society will bring to classrooms, Johnson uses statistics as
evidence. He offers that*

*eight million adult Americans have not finished five years of school;*

*almost 20 million Americans have not finished eight years of school;*

*more than one-quarter of Americans have not finished high school;*

*yearly, more than 100,000 high school graduates do not enter college
because they cannot afford it; and*

*many classrooms are overcrowded.*

Most of our qualified teachers are underpaid, and many of our paid
teachers are unqualified. So we must give every child a place to sit and
a teacher to learn from. Poverty must not be a bar to learning, and
learning must offer an escape from poverty.

But more classrooms and more teachers are not enough. We must seek an
educational system which grows in excellence as it grows in size. This
means better training for our teachers. It means preparing youth to
enjoy their hours of leisure as well as their hours of labor. It means
exploring new techniques of teaching, to find new ways to stimulate the
love of learning and the capacity for creation.

These are three of the central issues of the Great Society. While our
Government has many programs directed at those issues, I do not pretend
that we have the full answer to those problems.

Thesis Restated. *Johnson briefly summarizes his thesis: three issues of
the Great Society.*

But I do promise this: We are going to assemble the best thought and the
broadest knowledge from all over the world to find those answers for
America. I intend to establish working groups to prepare a series of
White House conferences and meetings---on the cities, on natural beauty,
on the quality of education, and on other emerging challenges. And from
these meetings and from this inspiration and from these studies we will
begin to set our course toward the Great Society. The solution to these
problems does not rest on a massive program in Washington, nor can it
rely solely on the strained resources of local authority. They require
us to create new concepts of cooperation, a creative federalism, between
the National Capital and the leaders of local communities.

Problem/Solution. *Johnson has pointed out the problems that America
faces and now presents solutions to them.*

Woodrow Wilson once wrote: "Every man sent out from his university
should be a man of his Nation as well as a man of his time." Within your
lifetime powerful forces, already loosed, will take us toward a way of
life beyond the realm of our experience, almost beyond the bounds of our
imagination.

Quotation from an Authority. *This quotation from a political expert
leads into Johnson's idea and acts as a transition, linking Wilson's and
Johnson's audiences across time.*

For better or for worse, your generation has been appointed by history
to deal with those problems and to lead America toward a new age. You
have the chance never before afforded to any people in any age. You can
help build a society where the demands of morality, and the needs of the
spirit, can be realized in the life of the Nation.

Ethos. *Johnson uses ethos to appeal to the patriotic ideals his
audience possesses for dealing with and finding a solution to America's
problems.*

So, will you join in the battle to give every citizen the full equality
which God enjoins and the law requires, whatever his belief, or race, or
the color of his skin?

Will you join in the battle to give every citizen an escape from the
crushing weight of poverty?

Will you join in the battle to make it possible for all nations to live
in enduring peace---as neighbors and not as mortal enemies?

Will you join in the battle to build the Great Society, to prove that
our material progress is only the foundation on which we will build a
richer life of mind and spirit?

Rhetorical Questions. *Johnson uses rhetorical questions (questions
intended to make a point rather than to get an answer) to encourage the
audience to get involved in the Great Society.*

There are those timid souls who say this battle cannot be won, that we
are condemned to a soulless wealth. I do not agree. We have the power to
shape the civilization that we want. But we need your will, your labor,
your hearts, if we are to build that kind of society.

Addressing a Counterclaim. *Johnson identifies a counterclaim to the
Great Society and then refutes it.*

Those who came to this land sought to build more than just a new
country. They sought a new world. So I have come here today to your
campus to say that you can make their vision our reality. So let us from
this moment begin our work so that in the future men will look back and
say: It was then, after a long and weary way, that man turned the
exploits of his genius to the full enrichment of his life.

Thank you. Goodby.

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00004}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
