m00103

55f553ba-22c6-4dd3-a3ed-41b6a4a04ed4

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Demonstrate brainstorming processes and tools as means to discover
topics, ideas, positions, and details.

Apply recursive strategies for organizing drafting, collaborating, peer
reviewing, revising, rewriting, and editing.

Compose a position argument that integrates the writer's ideas with
those from appropriate sources.

Give and act on productive feedback to works in progress.

Apply or challenge common conventions of language or grammar in
composing and revising.

Now is the time to try your hand at writing a position argument. Your
instructor may provide some possible topics or a singular topic. If your
instructor allows you to choose your own topic, consider a general
subject you feel strongly about and whether you can provide enough
support to develop that subject into an essay. For instance, suppose you
think about a general subject such as "adulting." In looking back at
what you have learned while becoming an adult, you think of what you
wish you had known during your early teenage years. These thoughts might
lead you to brainstorm about details of the effects of money in your
life or your friends' lives. In reviewing your brainstorming, you might
zero in on one topic you feel strongly about and think it provides
enough depth to develop into a position argument. Suppose your
brainstorming leads you to think about negative financial concerns you
or some of your friends have encountered. Thinking about what could have
helped address those concerns, you decide that a mandated high school
course in financial literacy would have been useful. This idea might
lead you to formulate your working thesis statement---first draft of
your thesis statement---like this: *To help students learn how to make
sensible financial decisions, a mandatory class in financial literacy
should be offered in high schools throughout the country.*

Once you decide on a topic and begin moving through the writing process,
you may need to fine-tune or even change the topic and rework your
initial idea. This fine-tuning may come as you brainstorm, later when
you begin drafting, or after you have completed a draft and submitted it
to your peers for constructive criticism. These possibilities occur
because the writing process is recursive---that is, it moves back and
forth almost simultaneously and maybe even haphazardly at times, from
planning to revising to editing to drafting, back to planning, and so
on.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Summary of Assignment {#sect-00002}

Write a position argument on a controversial issue that you choose or
that your instructor assigns to you. If you are free to choose your own
topic, consider one of the following:

The legal system would be strengthened if
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The growing use of technology in college classrooms is weakening
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

For safety reasons, public signage should be
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

For entrance into college, standardized testing
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

In relation to the cost of living, the current minimum wage
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

During a pandemic, America
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

As a requirement to graduate, college students
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

To guarantee truthfulness of their content, social media platforms have
the right to \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

To ensure inclusive and diverse representation of people of all races,
learning via virtual classrooms \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

Segments of American cultures have differing rules of acceptable
grammar, so in a college classroom
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

In addition, if you have the opportunity to choose your own topic and
wish to search further, take the lead from trailblazer Charles Blow and
look to media for newsworthy "trends." Find a controversial issue that
affects you or people you know, and take a position on it. As you craft
your argument, identify a position opposing yours, and then refute it
with reasoning and evidence. Be sure to gather information on the issue
so that you can support your position sensibly with well-developed ideas
and evidence.

Another Lens. To gain a different perspective on your issue, consider
again the people affected by it. Your position probably affects
different people in different ways. For example, if you are writing that
the minimum wage should be raised, then you might easily view the issue
through the lens of minimum-wage workers, especially those who struggle
to make ends meet. However, if you look at the issue through the lens of
those who employ minimum-wage workers, your viewpoint might change.
Depending on your topic and thesis, you may need to use print or online
sources to gain insight into different perspectives.

For additional information about minimum-wage workers, you could consult

printed material available in your college library;

databases in your college library; and

online sources. For instance, you could use a search engine to find
details about

pros and cons of raising the minimum wage;

what happens after the minimum wage is raised;

how to live on a minimum-wage salary;

how a raise in minimum wage is funded; and

minimum wage in various U.S. states.

To gain more insight about your topic, adopt a stance that opposes your
original position and brainstorm ideas from that viewpoint. Begin by
gathering evidence that would help you refute your previous stance and
appeal to your audience.

# Working Thesis Frames and Organization of Ideas {#sect-00003}

After you have decided on your topic, the next step is to arrive at your
working thesis. You probably have a good idea of the direction your
working thesis will take. That is, you know where you stand on the issue
or problem, but you are not quite sure of how to word your stance to
share it with readers. At this point, then, use brainstorming to think
critically about your position and to discover the best way to phrase
your statement.

For example, after reading an article discussing different state-funded
community college programs, one student thought that a similar program
was needed in Alabama, her state. However, she was not sure how the
program worked. To begin, she composed and answered "reporters'
questions" such as these:

What

does a state-funded community college program do?

pays for part or all of the tuition of a two-year college student

Who

qualifies for the program?

high school graduates and GED holders

Who

benefits from this?

students needing financial assistance, employers, and Alabama residents

Why

is this needed?

some can't afford to go to college; tuition goes up every year; colleges
would be more diverse if everyone who wanted to go could afford to go

Where

would the program be available?

at all public community colleges

When

could someone apply for the program?

any time

How

can the state fund this

? use lottery income, like other states

The student then reviewed her responses, altered her original idea to
include funding through a lottery, and composed this working thesis:

*To provide equal educational opportunities for all residents, the state
of Alabama should create a lottery to completely fund tuition at
community colleges.*

Remember that a strong thesis for a position should

state your stance on a debatable issue;

reflect your purpose of persuasion; and

be based on your opinion or observation.

When you first consider your topic for an argumentative work, think
about the reasoning for your position and the evidence you will
need---that is, think about the "because" part of your argument. For
instance, if you want to argue that your college should provide free
Wi-Fi for every student, extend your stance to include "because" and
then develop your reasoning and evidence. In that case, your argument
might read like this: *Ervin Community College should provide free Wi-Fi
for all students because students may not have Internet access at home.*

Note that the "because" part of your argument may come at the beginning
or the end and may be implied in your wording.

As you develop your thesis, you may need help funneling all of your
ideas. Return to the possibilities you have in mind, and select the
ideas that you think are strongest, that recur most often, or that you
have the most to say about. Then use those ideas to fill in one of the
following sentence frames to develop your working thesis. Feel free to
alter the frame as necessary to fit your position. While there is no
limit to the frames that are possible, these may help get you started.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ is caused/is not caused by
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, and \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ should
be done.

*Example:* A declining enrollment rate in college is caused by high
tuition rates, and an immediate freeze on the cost of tuition should be
applied.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ should/should not be allowed (to)
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ for a number of reasons.

*Example:* People who do not wear masks during a pandemic should not be
allowed to enter public buildings for a number of reasons.

Because (of) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_,
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ will happen/continue to happen.

*Example:* Because of a lack of emphasis on STEAM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, the Arts, and Mathematics) education in public schools,
America will continue to lag behind many other countries.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ is similar to/nothing like
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ because \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

*Example:* College classes are nothing like high school classes because
in college, more responsibility is on the student, the classes are less
frequent but more intense, and the work outside class takes more time to
complete.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ can be/cannot be thought of as
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ because
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

*Example:* The Black Lives Matter movement can be thought of as an
extension of the Civil Rights movement from the 1950s and 1960s because
it shares the same mission of fighting racism and ending violence
against Black people.

Next, consider the details you will need to support your thesis. The
Aristotelian argument structure, named for the Greek philosopher
Aristotle, is one that may help you frame the draft of your position
argument. For this method, use something like the following chart. In
Writing Process: Creating a Position Argument, you will find a similar
organizer that you can copy and use for your assignment.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

# Rhetorical Appeals and Types of Supporting Evidence {#sect-00004}

To persuade your audience to support your position or argument, consider
various rhetorical appeals--- ethos, logos, pathos, and kairos---and the
types of evidence to support your sound reasoning. See [Reasoning
Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking](#) for more information on
reasoning strategies and types of evidence.

## Rhetorical Appeals {#sect-00005}

To establish your credibility, to show readers you are trustworthy, to
win over their hearts, and to set your issue in an appropriate time
frame to influence readers, consider how you present and discuss your
evidence throughout the paper.

Appeal to

ethos

. To establish credibility in her paper arguing for expanded mental
health services, a student writer used these reliable sources: a student
survey on mental health issues, data from the International Association
of Counseling Services (a professional organization), and information
from an interview with a campus mental health counselor.

Appeal to

logos

. To support her sound reasoning, the student writer approached the
issue rationally, using data and credible evidence to explain the
current situation and its effects.

Appeal to

pathos

. To show compassion and arouse audience empathy, the student writer
shared the experience of a student on her campus who struggled with
anxiety and depression.

Appeal to

kairos

. To appeal to kairos, the student emphasized the immediate need for
these services, as more students are now aware of their particular
mental health issues and trying to deal with them.

The way in which you present and discuss your evidence will reflect the
appeals you use. Consider using sentence frames to reflect specific
appeals. Remember, too, that sentence frames can be composed in
countless ways. Here are a few frames to get you thinking critically
about how to phrase your ideas while considering different types of
appeals.

*Appeal to ethos:* According to \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, an
expert in \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_,
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ should/should not happen because
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

*Appeal to ethos:* Although \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_is not
an ideal situation for \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, it does have
its benefits.

*Appeal to logos:* If \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ is/is not
done, then understandably, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ will
happen.

*Appeal to logos:* This information suggests that
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ needs to be investigated
further because
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

*Appeal to pathos:* The story of
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ is
uplifting/heartbreaking/hopeful/tragic and illustrates the need for
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

*Appeal to pathos:* \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ is/are
suffering from \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, and that is something
no one wants.

*Appeal to kairos: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_* must be addressed
now because *\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_*.

*Appeal to kairos:* These are times when \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ ;
therefore, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ is appropriate/necessary.

## Types of Supporting Evidence {#sect-00006}

Depending on the point you are making to support your position or
argument, certain types of evidence may be more effective than others.
Also, your instructor may require you to include a certain type of
evidence. Choose the evidence that will be most effective to support the
reasoning behind each point you make to support your thesis statement.
Common types of evidence are these:

Anecdotes

:

short narrative.

Renada G., a junior at Powell College South, worked as a waitress for 15
hours a week during her first three semesters of college. But in her
sophomore year, when her parents were laid off during the pandemic,
Renada had to increase her hours to 35 per week and sell her car to stay
in school. Her grades started slipping, and she began experiencing
symptoms of depression and anxiety. When she called the campus health
center to make an appointment for counseling, Renada was told she would
have to wait two weeks before she could be seen.

Definition

:

explanation that emphasizes the meaning of an idea, term, or concept.

Here is part of how Lyndon B. Johnson defined the Great Society: "But
most of all, the Great Society is not a safe harbor, a resting place, a
final objective, a finished work. It is a challenge constantly renewed,
beckoning us toward a destiny where the meaning of our lives matches the
marvelous products of our labor."

Description

:

evidence that portrays a person, place, thing, or idea with sensory or
other vivid details.

Bowen Lake is nestled in verdant foothills, lush with tall grasses
speckled with wildflowers. Around the lake, the sweet scent of the
purple and yellow flowers fills the air, and the fragrance of the hearty
pines sweeps down the hillsides in a westerly breeze. Wood frogs' and
crickets' songs suddenly stop, as the blowing of moose calling their
calves echoes across the lake's soundless surface. Or this was the scene
before the deadly destruction of fires caused by climate change.

Example

:

evidence that illustrates an idea.

When elaborating on America's beauty being in danger, Johnson says, "The
water we drink, the food we eat, the very air that we breathe, are
threatened with pollution. Our parks are overcrowded, our seashores
overburdened. Green fields and dense forests are disappearing."

Expert opinion

:

evidence or viewpoints provided by a professional in the field or
someone whose ideas are respected on the subject.

Speaking about President Lyndon B. Johnson and the Vietnam War, noted
historian and Johnson biographer Doris Kearns Goodwin said, "It seemed
the hole in his heart from the loss of work was too big to fill."

Fact

:

information that is true and can be proven correct or accurate.

Charles Blow has worked at the *Shreveport Times*, *The Detroit News*,
*National Geographic*, and *The New York Times*.

Interview

:

evidence gathered firsthand from a source person, usually in a
person-to-person conversation, by phone, or through a remote meeting.

When interviewed by George Rorick and asked about the identities of his
readers, Charles Blow said that readers' emails do not elaborate on
descriptions of who the people are. However, "the kinds of comments that
they offer are very much on the thesis of the essay."

Quotation

:

exact words repeated by someone other than the original author or
speaker.

In his speech, Lyndon B. Johnson says, "The Great Society is a place
where every child can find knowledge to enrich his mind and to enlarge
his talents."

Statistics

:

numerical fact or item of data, usually from a study.

To support the need for change in classrooms, Johnson uses these
statistics: "Each year more than 100,000 high school graduates, with
proved ability, do not enter college because they cannot afford it. And
if we cannot educate today's youth, what will we do in 1970 when
elementary school enrollment will be five million greater than 1960?"

Visuals

:

graphs, photographs, charts, or maps used in addition to written or
spoken information.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

## Brainstorm for Supporting Points {#sect-00007}

Use one or more brainstorming techniques, such as a web diagram as shown
in [\#](#) or the details generated from "because" statements, to
develop ideas or particular points in support of your thesis. Your goal
is to get as many ideas as possible. At this time, do not be concerned
about how ideas flow, whether you will ultimately use an idea (you want
more ideas than will end up in your finished paper), spelling, or
punctuation.

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

When you have finished, look over your brainstorming. Then circle three
to five points to incorporate into your draft. Also, plan to answer
"reporters' questions" to provide readers with any needed background
information. For example, the student writing about the need for more
mental health counselors on her campus created and answered these
questions:

What *is needed?* More mental health counseling is needed for Powell
College South.

Who *would benefit from this?* The students and faculty would benefit.

Why

is this needed?

The college does not have enough counselors to meet all students' needs.

Where

are more counselors needed?

More counselors are needed at the south campus.

When

are the counselors needed?

Counselors need to be hired now and be available both day and night to
accommodate students' schedules.

How

can the college afford this

? Instead of hiring daycare workers, the college could use students and
faculty from the Early Childhood Education program to run the program
and use the extra money to pay the counselors.

## Using Logic {#sect-00008}

In a position argument, the appropriate use of logic is especially
important for readers to trust what you write. It is also important to
look for logic in material you read and possibly cite in your paper so
that you can determine whether writers' claims are reasonable. Two main
categories of logical thought are inductive reasoning and deductive
reasoning.

Inductive reasoning moves from specific to broad ideas. You begin by
collecting details, observations, incidents, or facts; examining them;
and drawing a conclusion from them. Suppose, for example, you are
writing about attendance in college classes. For three weeks, you note
the attendance numbers in all your Monday, Wednesday, and Friday classes
(specific details), and you note that attendance is lower on Friday than
on the other days (a specific detail). From these observations, you
determine that many students prefer not to attend classes on Fridays
(your conclusion).

Deductive reasoning moves from general to specific ideas. You begin with
a

hypothesis

or

premise

, a general concept, and then examine possibilities that would lead to a
specific and logical conclusion. For instance, suppose you think that
opportunities for foreign students at your college are inadequate
(general concept). You examine the specific parts of that concept (e.g.,
whether your college provides multicultural clubs, help with language
skills, or work-study opportunities) and determine that those
opportunities are not available. You then determine that opportunities
for foreign students are lacking at your college.

## Logical Fallacies and Propaganda {#sect-00009}

Fallacies are mistakes in logic. Readers and writers should be aware of
these when they creep into writing, indicating that the points the
writers make may not be valid. Two common fallacies are hasty
generalizations and circular arguments. See [Glance at Genre: Rhetorical
Strategies](#) for more on logical fallacies.

A

hasty generalization

is a conclusion based on either inadequate or biased evidence. Consider
this statement: "Two students in Math 103 were nervous before their
recent test; therefore, all students in that class must have text
anxiety." This is a hasty generalization because the second part of the
statement (the generalization about all students in the class) is
inadequate to support what the writer noted about only two students.

A

circular argument

is one that merely restates what has already been said. Consider this
statement: "

The Hate U Give

is a well-written book because Angie Thomas, its author, is a good
novelist." The statement that

Thomas

is a good novelist does not explain why her book is well written.

In addition to checking work for fallacies, consider propaganda,
information worded so that it endorses a particular viewpoint, often of
a political nature. Two common types of propaganda are bandwagon and
fear.

In getting on the

bandwagon

, the writer encourages readers to conform to a popular trend and
endorse an opinion, a movement, or a person because everyone else is
doing so. Consider this statement: "Everyone is behind the idea that 7
a.m. classes are too early and should be changed to at least 8 a.m.
Shouldn't you endorse this sensible idea, too?"

In using fear, the writer presents a dire situation, usually followed by
what could be done to prevent it. Consider this statement: "Our country
is at a turning point. Enemies threaten us with their power, and our
democracy is at risk of being crushed. The government needs a change,
and Paul Windhaus is just the man to see we get that change." This
quotation appeals to fear about the future of the country and implies
that electing a certain individual will solve the predicted problems.

<figure id="fig-00005">

</figure>

## Organize the Paper {#sect-00010}

To begin, write your thesis at the top of a blank page. Then select
points from your brainstorming and reporters' questions to organize and
develop support for your thesis. Keep in mind that you can revise your
thesis whenever needed.

To begin organizing her paper on increased mental health services on her
college campus, the student wrote this thesis at the top of a page:

*Because mental health is a major concern at Powell College South,
students could benefit from expanding the services offered*.

Next she decided the sequence in which to present the points. In a
position or an argument essay, she could choose one of two methods:
thesis-first organization or delayed-thesis organization.

## Thesis-First Organization {#sect-00011}

Leading with a thesis tells readers from the beginning where you stand
on the issue. In this organization, the thesis occupies both the first
and last position in the essay, making it easy for readers to remember.

*Introduce the issue and assert your thesis.* Make sure the issue has at
least two debatable sides. Your thesis establishes the position from
which you will argue. Writers often state their thesis as the last
sentence in the first paragraph, as the student writer has done:

The problem of mental health has become front-page news in the last two
months. *Hill's Herald*, Powell College South's newspaper, reported 14
separate incidents of students who sought counseling but could not get
appointments with college staff. *Since mental health problems are
widespread among the student population, the college should hire more
health care workers to address this problem.*

*Summarize the counterclaims*.** Before elaborating on your claims,
explain the opposition's claims. Including this information at the
beginning gives your argument something to focus on---and
refute---throughout the paper. If you ignore counterclaims, your
argument may appear incomplete, and readers may think you have not
researched your topic sufficiently. When addressing a counterclaim,
state it clearly, show empathy for those who have that view, and then
immediately refute it with support developed through reasoning and
evidence. Squeezing the counterclaims between the thesis and the
evidence reserves the strongest places---the opening and closing---for
your position.

*Counterclaim 1*: Powell College South already employs two counselors,
and that number is sufficient to meet the needs of the student
population.

*Counterclaim 2*: Students at Powell College South live in a
metropolitan area large enough to handle their mental health needs.

*Refute the counterclaims.* Look for weak spots in the opposition's
argument, and point them out. Use your opponent's language to show you
have read closely but still find problems with the claim. This is the
way the writer refuted the first counterclaim:

While Powell College South does employ two counselors, those counselors
are overworked and often have no time slots available for students who
wish to make appointments.

*State and explain your points, and then support them with evidence.*
Present your points clearly and precisely, using [Reasoning Strategies:
Improving Critical Thinking](#) to explain and cite your evidence. The
writer plans to use a problem-solution reasoning strategy to elaborate
on these three points using these pieces of evidence:

Point 1: Wait times are too long.

Kay Payne, one of the campus counselors, states that the wait time for
an appointment with her is approximately 10 days.

Point 2: Mental health issues are widespread within the student
community.

In a recent on-campus student survey, 75 percent of 250 students say
they have had some kind of mental health issues at some point in their
life.

Point 3: The staff-to-student ratio is too high.

The International Accreditation of Counseling Services states that the
recommended ratio is one full-time equivalent staff member for every
1,000 to 1,500 students.

*Restate your position as a conclusion.* Near the end of your paper,
synthesize your accumulated evidence into a broad general position, and
restate your thesis in slightly different language.

The number of students who need mental health counseling is alarming.
The recent news articles that attest to their not being able to schedule
appointments add to the alarm. While Powell College South offers some
mental health counseling, the current number of counselors and others
who provide health care is insufficient to handle the well-being of all
its students. Action must be taken to address this problem.

## Delayed-Thesis Organization {#sect-00012}

In this organizational pattern, introduce the issue and discuss the
arguments for and against it, but wait to take a side until late in the
essay. By delaying the stance, you show readers you are weighing the
evidence, and you arouse their curiosity about your position. Near the
end of the paper, you explain that after carefully considering both pros
and cons, you have arrived at the most reasonable position.

*Introduce the issue.* Here, the writer begins with action that sets the
scene of the problem.

Tapping her foot nervously, Serena looked at her watch again. She had
been waiting three hours to see a mental health counselor at Powell
College South, and she did not think she could wait much longer. She had
to get to work.

*Summarize the claims for one position.* Before stating which side you
support, explain how the opposition views the issue. This body paragraph
presents evidence about the topic of more counselors:

Powell College South has two mental health counselors on staff. If the
college hires more counselors, more office space will have to be
created. Currently Pennington Hall could accommodate those counselors.
Additional counselors would allow more students to receive counseling.

*Refute the claims you just stated.* Still not stating your position,
point out the other side of the issue.

While office space is available in Pennington Hall, that location is far
from ideal. It is in a wooded area of campus, six blocks from the
nearest dorm. Students who would go there might be afraid to walk
through the woods or might be afraid to walk that distance. The location
might deter them from making appointments.

*Now give the best reasoning and evidence to support your position.*
Because this is a delayed-thesis organization, readers are still unsure
of your stance. This section should be the longest and most carefully
documented part of the paper. After summarizing and refuting claims, the
writer then elaborates on these three points using problem-solution
reasoning supported by this evidence as discussed in Reasoning
Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking, implying her position before
moving to the conclusion, where she states her thesis.

Point 1: Wait times are too long.

Kay Payne, one of the campus counselors, states that the wait time for
an appointment with her is approximately 10 days.

Point 2: Mental health issues are widespread within the student
community.

In a recent on-campus student survey, 75 percent of 250 students say
they have had some kind of mental health issues at some point in their
life.

Point 3: The staff-to-student ratio is too high.

The International Association of Counseling Services states that one
full-time equivalent staff member for every 1,000 to 1,500 students is
the recommended ratio.

*State your thesis in your conclusion.* Your rhetorical strategy is
this: after giving each side a fair hearing, you have arrived at the
most reasonable conclusion.

According to the American Psychological Association, more than 40
percent of all college students suffer from some form of anxiety. Powell
College South students are no different from college students elsewhere:
they deserve to have adequate mental health counseling.

## Compose {#sect-00013}

Drafting begins when you organize your evidence or research notes and
then put them into some kind of written form. As you write, focus on
building body paragraphs through the techniques presented in [Reasoning
Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking](#) that show you how to support
your position and then add evidence. Using a variety of evidence types
builds credibility with readers. Remember that the recursiveness of the
writing process allows you to move from composing to gathering evidence
and back to brainstorming ideas or to organizing your draft at any time.
Move around the writing process as needed.

Keep in mind that a first draft is just a beginning---you will revise it
into a better work in later drafts. Your first draft is sometimes called
a *discovery draft* because you are discovering how to shape your paper:
which ideas to include and how to support those ideas. These suggestions
and graphic organizer may be helpful for your first draft:

Write your thesis at the top of the paper.

Compose your body paragraphs: those that support your argument through
reasoning strategies and those that address counterclaims.

Leave your introduction, conclusion, and title for later drafts.

Use a graphic organizer like [\#](#) to focus points, reasoning, and
evidence for body paragraphs. You are free to reword your thesis,
reasoning, counterclaim(s), refutation of counterclaim(s), concrete
evidence, and explanation/elaboration/clarification at any time. You are
also free to adjust the order in which you present your reasoning,
counterclaim(s), and refuting of counterclaim(s).

+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| *Composing Your First Draft*                                                                                                                               |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| *Position Argument*                                                                                                                                        |
+============================================================================================================================================================+
| Name \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_      |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Thesis: In your thesis, remember to include 1) an explanation of the issue and 2) your position about what should happen regarding the issue.              |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Issue:                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| My position:                                                                                                                                               |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Thesis as a single declarative sentence: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_                                                                                                  |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Background information:                                                                                                                                    |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Reporters' questions:                                                                                                                                      |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_                   |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Point 1 in support of thesis:                                                                                                                              |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Reasoning: explanation/elaboration/clarification:                                                                                                          |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Concrete evidence:                                                                                                                                         |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_       |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Point 2 in support of thesis:                                                                                                                              |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Reasoning: explanation/elaboration/clarification:                                                                                                          |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Concrete evidence:                                                                                                                                         |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Point 3 in support of thesis:                                                                                                                              |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Reasoning: explanation/elaboration/clarification:                                                                                                          |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Concrete evidence:                                                                                                                                         |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_     |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Points 4 & 5 in support of thesis:                                                                                                                         |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Reasoning: explanation/elaboration/clarification:                                                                                                          |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Concrete evidence:                                                                                                                                         |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_           |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Counterclaim:                                                                                                                                              |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Reasoning: explanation/elaboration/clarification:                                                                                                          |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_       |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Refuting of counterclaim:                                                                                                                                  |
|                                                                                                                                                            |
| Reasoning: explanation/elaboration/clarification:                                                                                                          |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

: Position argument drafting organizer {#table-00001}

## Develop a Writing Project through Multiple Drafts {#sect-00014}

Your first draft is a kind of experiment in which you are concerned with
ideas and with getting the direction and concept of the paper clear. Do
not think that your first draft must be perfect; remind yourself that
you are just honing your work. In most serious writing, every phase of
the process can be considered recursive, helping you shape the best
paper possible.

# Critical Thinking and Counterclaims {#sect-00015}

After you have completed the first draft, begin peer review. Peer
reviewers can use these sentence starters when thinking critically about
overall strengths and developmental needs.

One point about your position that I think is strong is \_\_\_\_\_\_
because \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

One point about your position that I think needs more development is
\_\_\_\_\_ because \_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

One area that I find confusing is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_; I was
confused about \_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

One major point that I think needs more explanation or detail is
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

In my opinion, the purpose of your paper is to persuade readers
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

In my opinion, the audience for your paper is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

One area of supporting evidence that I think could use more development
is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

One counterclaim you include is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

Your development of the counterclaim is
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ because
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

## Refuting Counterclaims {#sect-00016}

Peer reviewers are especially helpful with position and argument writing
when it comes to refuting counterclaims. Have your peer reviewer read
your paper again and look for supporting points and ideas to argue
*against*, trying to break down your argument. Then ask your reviewer to
discuss the counterclaims and corresponding points or ideas in your
paper. This review will give you the opportunity to think critically
about ways to refute the counterclaims your peer reviewer suggests.

As preparation for peer review, match each of the following arguments
with their counterarguments.

# Reviewing a Draft and Responding to Counterclaims {#sect-00017}

Revising means reseeing, rereading, and rethinking your thoughts on
paper until they fully match your intention. Mentally, it is conceptual
work focused on units of meaning larger than the sentence. Physically,
it is cutting, pasting, deleting, and rewriting until the ideas are
satisfying. Be ready to spend a great deal of time revising your drafts,
adding new information and incorporating sources smoothly into your
prose.

## The Revising Process {#sect-00018}

To begin revising, return to the basic questions of topic (*What am I
writing about?*), purpose (*Why am I writing about this topic?*),
audience (*For whom am I writing?*), and culture (*What is the
background of the people for whom I am writing?*).

Questions about the topic.

Be sure your topic and thesis focus on your position, and omit extra
material. Answer these questions:

What is the general scope of my topic?
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

What is my thesis?
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Does my thesis focus on my topic?
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Does my thesis clearly state my position?
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Questions about purpose.

It is often easier to locate your purpose---or lack of purpose---after
you have written a draft or two. Answer these questions:

What do I hope to accomplish in writing about this topic?
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Do all parts of the paper advance this purpose?
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Does my paper focus on my argument or position?
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Questions about audience.

Make sure your paper is aimed accurately at your readers. Answer these
questions:

What does my audience know about this subject?
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

What does my audience need to know to understand the point of my paper?
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

What questions or objections do I anticipate from my audience?
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Questions about culture.

Your paper should reflect consideration of cultural differences, if any,
between you and your audience. Answer these questions:

What is the culture of the people for whom I am writing? Do all readers
share the same culture?
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

How do my beliefs, values, and customs differ from those of my audience?

*\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_*

How do the cultures of the authors of sources I cite differ from my
culture or the culture(s) of my audience?
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Because of the recursivity of the writing process, returning to these
questions will help you fine-tune the language and structure of your
writing and target the support you develop for your audience.

## Responding to Counterclaims {#sect-00019}

The more complex the issue, the more opposing sides it may have. For
example, a writer whose position is that Powell College South Campus
should offer daycare to its students with children might find opposition
for different reasons. Someone may oppose the idea out of concern for
cost; someone else may support the idea if the daycare is run on a
volunteer basis; someone else may support the idea if the services are
offered off campus.

As you revise, continue studying your peer reviewer's comments about
counterclaims. If you agree with any counterclaim, then say so in the
paragraph in which you address counterclaims. This agreement will
further establish your credibility by showing your fairness and concern
for the issue. Look over your paper and peer review comments, and then
consider these questions:

In what ways do you address realistic counterclaims? What other
counterclaims should you address? Should you add to or replace current
counterclaims?

In what ways do you successfully refute counterclaims? What other
refutations might you include?

Are there any counterclaims with which you agree? If so, how do you
concede to them in your paper? In what ways does your discussion show
fairness?

After completing your peer review and personal assessment, make
necessary revisions based on these notes. See Annotated Student Sample
an example of a student's argumentative research essay. Note how the
student

presents the argument;

supports the viewpoint with reasoning and evidence;

includes support in the form of facts, opinions, paraphrases, and
summaries;

provides citations (correctly formatted) about material from other
sources in the paper;

uses ethos, pathos, and logos throughout the paper; and

addresses counterclaims (dissenting opinions).
