m00104

a6effe4c-d96c-484f-9052-4f93d26da570

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Implement transitional words and phrases in a position argument.

Apply genre conventions in paragraphs and transitions for general and
specific situations.

In the initial drafts of your paper, you may have concentrated on single
ideas for your body paragraphs and single thoughts within those
paragraphs. Your argument will read more smoothly, however, if you use
transitional words and phrases to show readers how your ideas are
connected or opposed to each other.

# Using Transitional Words and Phrases {#sect-00002}

To organize your paper most effectively, use transitional words or
phrases, which show readers the relationship between different
ideas---that is, how ideas connect with or are separate from each other.
In the paragraph below, transitional words and phrases are underlined.

To get a copy of your transcript from Abbott Community College, *first*
log on to the college web site. *Next*, click the "Transcript" link *to
the left of* the college logo. *When* the link opens, fill out the
information requested in the boxes. *Then* upload a copy of your student
ID *and* pay \$10 electronically. *Finally*, submit your form. Your
transcript will be emailed to you, *but* you may have to wait up to
three days *before* you receive it.

The transitional words and phrases show readers the sequence of steps
they need to follow to get a transcript. If you remove the transitional
words and phrases, the paragraph would be choppy, and readers might not
follow the steps as easily.

Transitions also help guide readers between paragraphs. Below are the
body paragraphs a student wrote about the need for a traffic light at a
street that leads into his college. The first version has no
transitions.

Many vehicles speed through the intersection without regard to the
posted speed limit. A traffic signal would make vehicles slow down. They
would not be able to speed through the signal.

Pedestrian safety is a problem. Many students and others cross this
intersection when coming to or leaving campus, and they must dodge
traffic to get across. A traffic signal would allow them to cross at
appropriate times.

The amount of traffic has increased dramatically. A manufacturing plant
opened four blocks from the intersection. The number of businesses in
the strip mall at the intersection has grown by 50 percent. The college
has changed its traffic routing for football games. Fans must enter via
this intersection.

The most compelling reason to install a traffic signal is that the
number of accidents has risen far past an acceptable limit. According to
recent police reports, a traffic accident occurs at least three times a
month. One accident resulted in a loss of life.

The student then added transitions and changed the wording accordingly
to help readers follow his ideas. The underlined transitions at the
beginning of each paragraph alert readers to the four reasons he
presents and to where he changes from one to another. The underlined
transitions within the paragraphs help readers understand the
relationship of ideas.

*First*, many vehicles speed through the intersection without regard to
the posted speed limit. A traffic signal would make vehicles slow down,
*for* they would not be able to speed through the signal.

*Second*, pedestrian safety is a problem. Many students and others cross
this intersection when coming to or leaving campus, and *now* they must
dodge traffic to get across. A traffic signal, *therefore*, would allow
them to cross at appropriate times.

*Another reason to install the traffic signal has to do with* the amount
of traffic, which has increased dramatically *in recent years*. *Two
years ago*, a manufacturing plant opened four blocks from the
intersection. *In the past 16 months*, the number of businesses in the
strip mall *at the intersection* grew by 50 percent. *Furthermore*, the
college has changed its traffic routing for football games, *and now*
fans must enter via this intersection.

*Finally*, the most compelling reason to install a traffic signal is
that the number of accidents has risen far past an acceptable limit.
According to recent police reports, a traffic accident occurs at that
intersection at least three times a month. *In fact*, one of those
accidents resulted in a loss of life.

# Frequently Used Transitional Words and Phrases {#sect-00003}

*Addition:* again, and, further, in addition, next, then, also, as well
as

Cause-and-effect*:* accordingly, consequently, for this reason, hence,
therefore, thus, as a result

Amplification*:* again, also, apparently, first (second, third),
moreover, indeed, more, most, in fact

Chronological order*:* after, before, during, earlier, finally, first
(second, third), immediately, last, next, then, later

Concession or agreement*:* although, at least, at any rate, certainly,
(even) though, in spite of, of course, still, nevertheless, nonetheless

Compare and contrast*:* at the same time, comparatively, conversely,
however, instead, likewise, moreover, nevertheless, on the contrary, on
the other hand, rather, similarly, still, yet, despite

Detail*:* including, in particular, namely, specifically, to list

Emphasis *or* clarification*:* above all, again, certainly, especially,
furthermore, in fact, particularly, indeed

Example*:* chiefly, for example (instance), in other words, in
particular, mainly, specifically

Intention*:* for this purpose, in order to do this, to this end, with
this in mind

Location*:* above, along, behind, below, here, near, next to, opposite,
to the left (right) of, under

Summary*:* finally, in conclusion, in short, in other words, thus

For more information about paragraphs and transitions, see [Paragraphs
and Transitions](#).
