m00106

c4449688-916f-4f8b-9b55-45e52e3f08aa

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Apply citation conventions systematically in your work.

Demonstrate an understanding of the concepts of intellectual property
that motivate documentation conventions.

Academic writing relies on evidence and support. When this evidence or
support comes from others, you must cite it properly to give credit
where credit is due. Citing information to its source will build your
credibility. See [Research Process: Accessing and Recording
Information](#) and [MLA Documentation and Format](#) and [APA
Documentation and Format](#) for more information on citations.

# Types of Citation {#sect-00002}

In a position argument, you are expected to provide evidence that
supports your stance and addresses counterclaims to it. You may use one
of three types of citation: quoting, paraphrasing, or summarizing. If
you are quoting the exact words of a person or a written work, you must

use quotation marks around the words;

credit the source of your quotation; and

use the formatting style mandated in the style guide your instructor
assigns.

If you are *paraphrasing*, you are shaping someone else's words into
your own words, but you are conveying the same meaning as the original
speaker or writer. When you are paraphrasing in academic writing,
provide formatted information about the original source so that readers
know from whom the idea originates.

If you are *summarizing*, you are condensing the words of someone else
into a shorter form but still retaining the main point and major
details. As with quoting and paraphrasing, provide formatted information
about the original source when you are summarizing.

For more information about quoting, paraphrasing, and summarizing, see
Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information.

# Examples of Types of Citation {#sect-00003}

American author Jack London (1876--1916) began his novel *The Call of
the Wild* (1903) with this paragraph:

Buck did not read the newspapers, or he would have known that trouble
was brewing, not alone for himself, but for every tide-water dog, strong
of muscle and with warm, long hair, from Puget Sound to San Diego.
Because men, groping in the Arctic darkness, had found a yellow metal,
and because steamship and transportation companies were booming the
find, thousands of men were rushing into the Northland.

## Quoting in MLA style {#sect-00004}

If you are quoting from that paragraph using MLA style, you might have
something like this:

*The Call of the Wild* sets the contrasting tone for the story with its
second sentence, highlighting the differences between nature and
industrialization: "Because men, groping in the Arctic darkness, had
found a yellow metal, and because steamship and transportation companies
were booming the find, thousands of men were rushing into the Northland"
(London 1).

## Quoting in APA style {#sect-00005}

If you are quoting from that paragraph using APA style, you might have
something like this:

*The Call of the Wild* sets the contrasting tone for the story with its
second sentence, highlighting the differences between nature and
industrialization: "Because men, groping in the Arctic darkness, had
found a yellow metal, and because steamship and transportation companies
were booming the find, thousands of men were rushing into the Northland"
(London, 1903, p. 1).

## Paraphrasing {#sect-00006}

If you are paraphrasing that paragraph, you might have something like
this:

In the opening paragraph of *The Call of the Wild*, Jack London
establishes the conflict between man and nature by letting readers know
that because Buck doesn't read, he doesn't know that trouble is at hand
for himself and every other dog on the west coast of the United States.
The trouble occurs because gold has been discovered in the Arctic and
thousands of men are rushing to the Northland by land and sea so that
they can also take part in the discovery.

## Summarizing {#sect-00007}

If you are summarizing that paragraph, you might have something like
this:

In the opening paragraph of *The Call of the Wild*, Jack London
establishes the conflict between man and nature by telling readers that
neither Buck nor any other dog knows that trouble at hand because of the
gold discovered and men rushing to find it.

# Intellectual property {#sect-00008}

When you create a written work, you do not want someone else to take
credit for it. It is your intellectual property, an original idea
resulting from your creativity and work and that, consequently, you own.
If you look at a book, for instance, you will see a copyright symbol (©)
somewhere in the opening pages, usually along with other publication
information. This symbol gives the copyright owner legal protection
against those who try to plagiarize (steal material and publish it as
their own). *Plagiarism* can refer to entire works or parts of works
that are not cited as being created by someone else, whether the work is
copyrighted or not. If writers or speakers use someone else's words,
ideas, or information, they must cite the source. For detailed
information about what plagiarism is and is not, see [Spotlight on ...
Ethical Research](#).
