m00107

08e7bcd3-c538-4e0b-a194-cae54aaf1ec5

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Reflect on and articulate how you used the steps of the writing process
and how they affected your work.

Reflect on and write about your use of reasoning and critical-thinking
skills in developing your paper.

As you complete each writing assignment, you complete another part of
your portfolio. After each paper, think critically about your writing
process, reflecting on what you created from the first steps of
discovering ideas to the last steps of composing and editing the final
paper.

# Lessons Learned {#sect-00002}

As you reflect on writing your position argument, answer these questions
about your writing process.

What factors helped you determine the topic for your paper?

Which brainstorming method worked best for you to develop ideas for your
topic?

How did you arrive at a workable thesis?

How did you use ethos, pathos, and logos in your paper?

How did you use kairos in your paper?

What outside sources did you consult to get information to support your
topic or to understand counterclaims?

How did you determine which counterclaims to address?

What type of citation did you use for giving credit to material you did
not write?

How did collaboration with others help you as you wrote and revised your
paper?

In collaboration, what specific constructive criticism did you receive
that helped you?

In what ways was this paper easier or harder to write than others you
have written?

What could you have done differently to make writing your paper easier
or more effective?

What insights about your topic did you gain from writing your paper?

# Further Reading {#sect-00003}

The following titles are well-known examples of position speeches or
papers.

Blow, Charles. "Charles M. Blow: Politics, public opinion, and social
justice." *The New York Times*,
https://www.nytimes.com/column/charles-m-blow. Accessed 17 Mar. 2022.

Grimke, Francis J. "Equality of Rights for All Citizens, Black and White
Alike." *Masterpieces of Negro Eloquence,* edited by Alice Moore Dunbar,
1914. *Project Gutenberg,* www.gutenberg.org/files/22240/22240-8.txt.
Accessed 10 Dec. 2020.

Henry, Patrick. "Convention of Delegates, March 28, 1775." *American
Eloquence: Studies in American Political History, Vol. 1,* edited by
James Albert Woodburn, G.P. Putnam's Sons, 1896. *Project Gutenberg,*
www.gutenberg.org/files/15391/15391-h/15391-h.htm#link2H_4_0006.
Accessed 10 Dec. 2020.

Mandela, Winnie. "Speech made by Mrs. Winnie Mandela to Mark the
Creation of the Black Parents' Association." 1978. *South African
History Online*,
www.sahistory.org.za/archive/speech-made-mrs-winnie-mandela-mark.
Accessed 6 Feb 2021.

Roosevelt, Franklin D. "Speech by Franklin D. Roosevelt, New York
Transcript." 1941. *Library of Congress*,
www.loc.gov/item/afccal000483/.

Roosevelt, Theodore. "New Nationalism Speech." 1910. *Teaching American
History,*
teachingamericanhistory.org/library/document/new-nationalism-speech/.
Accessed 6 Feb. 2021.

Truth, Sojourner. "Ain't I a Woman?" 1851. *National Park Service*,
www.nps.gov/articles/sojourner-truth.htm. Accessed 10 Dec. 2020

# Works Cited {#sect-00004}

Johnson, Lyndon B. "May 22, 1964: Remarks at the University of
Michigan." *Miller Center*, 28 Apr. 2017,
millercenter.org/the-presidency/presidential-speeches/may-22-1964-remarks-university-michigan.

London, Jack. *Call of the Wild*. Macmillan, 1903.

Quinn, Sara Dickenson. "NYT Columnist Uses Visual Evidence to Support
Persuasive Arguments." *Poynter*, 24 Nov. 2014,
www.poynter.org/reporting-editing/2008/nyt-columnist-uses-visual-evidence-to-support-persuasive-arguments/.

Thurman, Susan Sommers, and William L. Gary, Jr. *Ticket to Write:
Writing College Essays*. Pearson Education, 2017.
