m00166

1aaca562-a9b0-4597-a748-4e2d2c167d18

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

While writing academic text may take up the bulk of your time as a
student, other aspects of life involve writing as well, especially as
you move toward an engaged social life and a career. One personal or
professional task in particular is writing to speak. Whether speaking as
part of a classroom assignment, a planned address, a professional
presentation, or recording a video to post to a video-sharing social
media platform, script writing shares much more with traditional
academic writing than you might first believe. A successful speaking
event is not achieved by a perfectly planned outline or even extensive
research and knowledge on a topic---although these are important
aspects. No, the key to memorable speech is the speaker's connection
with an audience, or group of listeners.

Greek philosophers and educators wrote the first texts for public
speaking over 2,000 years ago. In fact, Greek philosopher Aristotle
(384--322 BCE) wrote the treatise *On Rhetoric*, which covers many of
the same concepts and topics you will encounter in this chapter,
including rhetorical appeals, awareness of audience, and organization.
As it turns out, effectively engaging an audience through speech is a
time-honored endeavor. But new technologies, channels, and avenues of
communication have expanded the opportunities for more and more voices
to be heard.

In this chapter, you will read about podcast trailblazer Alice Wong,
read a student script, and write your own script or outline advocating
for a cause of your choice. Speaking of activism, you will discover how
script writing and activism go hand in hand, opening new possibilities
for communicating with your audience.
