m00167

c0138a9b-ceaa-4a44-b8d3-55635e7012d9

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Articulate how genre conventions shape and are shaped by readers' and
writers' practices and purposes.

Identify and apply rhetorical concepts such as shifts in voice, diction,
tone, formality, design, medium, and structure appropriate to a speech.

Match the capacities of different environments to varying rhetorical
situations.

The genre of this chapter is script writing. A genre is a type of
composition that uses specific features, follows a particular style or
format, and is shaped by the author's purpose, or what the author wants
to accomplish. In a script, the purpose is what the author wants to
communicate to the audience and wants the audience to think about or do
after the speech. Speech is often used as a vehicle to persuade
audiences or move them to action.

# Writing for and beyond the Academy {#sect-00002}

By now, you are likely familiar with the concept of rhetoric, which, in
academic terms, describes how writers and speakers use language to
persuade. Rhetoric has its roots in ancient Greece, dating back to
Homer's epic poems (mid-8th century BCE), and was developed by the
philosophers Socrates (c. 470--399 BCE) and Aristotle into a system for
understanding and teaching persuasion. If you have ever analyzed a
speech or story to determine how the author develops or supports claims,
chances are you have studied rhetoric. Refer to [Rhetorical Analysis:
Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric](#) and [Position Argument: Practicing
the Art of Rhetoric](#) for more about rhetoric.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

However, rhetoric is not simply an academic exercise designed to be used
in formal writing or literature. Rhetoric is the basis of the spoken
language people use every day, and it has a purpose. As an example,
think of a commercial or advertisement. Advertisers use rhetoric to try
to convince an audience that their beauty product is superior to other
companies' products, or that it's cooler to drive their car than another
car. Indeed, effective speech uses some form of rhetoric, combined with
purpose, to make an impact on an audience.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

[\#](#) illustrates how three types of appeal form the elements of a
strong argument. In brief, these are the rhetorical appeals available to
writers:

Ethos

is an appeal to ethics, which, in rhetorical terms, helps establish the
writer's or speaker's credibility. You must establish credibility with
your audience so that they feel they can trust what you say. Ethos often
invokes the speaker's character and qualifications on the subject.
Speakers may strengthen their ethical appeal by using or referring to
patriotic or religious documents in their speeches.

Logos

is an appeal to logic and intelligence. Logos appeals rely on strong and
sound reasoning, often supported by facts and statistics. Support your
position with

critical thinking

and clear, credible

evidence

. To give yourself credibility, use respected, reliable sources that are
properly attributed.

Pathos

is an appeal to emotion. Supporting your position by using pathos
involves evoking in your audience emotions, such as fear, anger,
sympathy, guilt, or sorrow. This appeal often involves dramatic or vivid
language, anecdotes or illustrations, and a more personal tone. For more
information on ethos, logos, and pathos, see

Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric

and

Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

.

# Identifying General Purpose {#sect-00003}

The purpose of speech, like any type of writing, is directly related to
the rhetorical situation, which defines how a speaker will use
communication to influence an audience's perspective. Speech is created
for a specific time, place, and audience, by a speaker who makes choices
on the basis of the rhetorical and cultural context.

Speech typically falls into one of three categories. Some speak to teach
the audience something or to explain something. The purpose of this
speech is to inform. Some speak to influence an audience's beliefs,
behaviors, or attitudes. The purpose of this speech is to persuade. Some
speak to amuse the audience. The purpose of this speech is to entertain.
In some instances, the purposes will overlap; a speaker may want both to
persuade and to evoke emotion, for example. Consider President Franklin
D. Roosevelt's (1882--1945) [Pearl Harbor speech](#). It was delivered
as an informational speech on December 8, 1941, at a joint session of
Congress to address Japan's bombing of Pearl Harbor, which occurred a
day earlier. However, Roosevelt crafted the speech to stir emotions and
convince Congress to formally declare war against Japan, officially
bringing the United States into World War II (1939--1945).

When writing to speak, consider whether you want to inform, entertain,
or persuade your audience. These purposes are often combined, as in the
Pearl Harbor speech, and the medium through which you present speech may
use different formats and channels (podcast, YouTube, Facebook Live,
Periscope, Vimeo, presentation to a live audience, and so on). However,
your ultimate goal will always be to connect meaningfully with your
audience to achieve your general purpose.

The formula for establishing your purpose is fairly straightforward.
Identify your audience, determine what you want to tell them, then
analyze the best way to reach them. By following these steps, you will
have defined your purpose, and you can create effective and meaningful
speech.

## Informative Speech {#sect-00004}

Informative speech explains, describes, or demonstrates. The speaker's
aim is to provide information that will be comprehensible to audience
members. Informative speech may cover topics such as describing a
location, an object, or a person; explaining an idea or how to operate
something, a thermostat, for example; or demonstrating how to change a
tire. The speech will be organized according to the specific purpose and
audience. Informative speech usually incorporates media---for example,
visuals, three-dimensional objects, or video---to illustrate the content
of the speech.

## Entertaining Speech {#sect-00005}

Entertaining speech features the use of humor to connect with an
audience. This speech may comment on the humor present in everyday
situations or use humor for social commentary. When you speak to
entertain, you will call upon elements of humor such as
self-deprecation, physical comedy, absurdity, wordplay, topical
observation, or dark comedy.

## Persuasive Speech {#sect-00006}

Persuasive speech seeks to convince audience members of something or
influence their beliefs, values, or behavior. This type of speech either
reinforces an audience's existing beliefs on a topic, changes their
beliefs, or inspires them to act on something. When you speak
persuasively, you will use many of the same principles you used when you
wrote the position argument in [Position Argument: Practicing the Art of
Rhetoric](#).

You likely will present your thesis, or statement of your position, at
the beginning of your script and then devote most of the script to
supporting that position. On the other hand, you might consider
presenting the thesis later in the script, after you have provided
compelling evidence to support it. In this case, the delayed thesis
creates a dramatic effect. You might also save it for the end if you
know your audience is likely to disagree with it. You can structure a
script written to persuade as a five-part argument with the following
features:

An

introduction

that hooks, or engages, the audience sets the

tone

, or writer's attitude toward the audience or subject, and states the
thesis if is presented early.

Background information

provides

context

and details for the situation being discussed. These are closely linked
to purpose and explain why the audience should care about the topic.

The

body

of the script explains the argument (if persuasive) and provides
compelling reasons and evidence.

Refutation of counterclaims

disproves or rules out objections.

A

conclusion

presents a closing argument, stating or restating the thesis and
summarizing the main points of the script.

Transitions

within the script guide the listener smoothly from one idea to the next.

# Audience Awareness {#sect-00007}

When you are writing to speak, audience awareness is particularly
important. After all, the audience is often right there in front of you!
Your goal is to speak directly to them, to evoke emotion or make them
react, even if silently. Consider your audience when choosing your tone,
language, and approach to a topic. Knowing your audience and crafting
your writing for them will help you connect and thus fulfill your
purpose. Among the most famous speeches of all time, Martin Luther King
Jr.'s ["I Have a Dream" speech](#) is known for inspiring civil rights
progress in the United States.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

All speech is designed for a particular audience at a particular time.
Because effective speakers seek to know their audience, they consider
demography, the statistical study of human populations, focusing on
categories such as age, gender, education, religion, race, and so forth.
Demographics are the statistical data gathered from studies in these and
other areas relating to populations. Although your audience may be quite
specific and you may know some of its demographics, it is important to
design your script outline to include examples, ideas, and appeals that
are broadly understood. The circumstances that lead your audience to you
will also influence their interest and reaction to your presentation. A
presentation to a captive audience---those who attend because of some
outside force rather than their own choice---will require you to spend
more time building common ground than you would with an audience you
know to be more receptive. Contrast this situation with a speech at a
political rally, where voluntary attendees are likely to share political
beliefs. As is evident, understanding your audience is imperative to
knowing how to speak to them. Considering their attitudes, beliefs,
cultures, and values, including those they share with one another and
with you as the speaker, will allow you to understand how much attention
you need to devote to convincing the audience of your viewpoint.

When analyzing your audience in this way, you also will want to consider
their prior knowledge and relationship with the topic. *Do they already
have a solid understanding of the topic?* If they do, there is no need
to spend much time on background information. *Are they largely opposed
to the premise of your thesis?* If so, you will need to provide
effective reasoning and strong evidence to convince them. The amount of
background knowledge required will influence how you shape your script
or outline and thus your speech.

Audience awareness also can help you decide which rhetorical appeals and
devices to use within your script. You need to consider how you relate
to the audience. *Are you an expert on a topic? Are you a peer in their
community? Do you (or they) have cultural intricacies that influence
your understanding of the topic?* These questions, combined with
cultural awareness, can guide your composition.

# Cultural Context {#sect-00008}

Culture---the shared values, customs, arts, and other traits of a group
of people---is an important consideration when developing a relationship
with your audience. Speech---particularly formal, persuasive speech---is
a part of the American social and political systems. Candidates for
political office commonly use speech during campaigns. Consider former
president Barack Obama's (b. 1961) [introductory speech at the 2004
Democratic National Convention](#), which political scholars credit with
his rise to the presidency. Lawyers regularly use speech to argue their
cases before judges and juries. Religious leaders have long used speech
from the pulpit to challenge and influence congregants. Moreover, as
American culture morphs and grows, speech has become an important part
of everyday life in ways not witnessed in earlier times.

Radio and television have existed as vehicles for delivering speech for
many years. But in the past two decades, speech has found new outlets,
including podcasts (streamed spoken-word audio), YouTube videos, and
social media videos. This influx of new formats has created a cultural
shift, making speech, and by extension its influences on a large
audience, more accessible and representative. This shift has also
increased the level of social, political, and economic activism.
Understanding the cultural context of your audience and the subject of
your speech is as important as any other part of it, for this context
will dictate whether your words are effectively received.
