m00168

9f0f5176-c16f-4ecf-bff6-88fdb854da42

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Articulate how genre conventions shape and are shaped by readers' and
writers' practices and purposes.

Match the capacities of different environments (e.g., print, electronic)
to varying rhetorical situations.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

"Stories are the closest we can come to shared experience."
::::

# The Disability Visibility Project {#sect-00002}

Alice Wong (b. 1974) is an activist, writer, and media creator from San
Francisco, California. After graduating from Indiana University in 1997
with majors in English and sociology, Wong went on to earn a master's
degree in sociology from the University of California, San Francisco,
where she later worked. Wong has been widely published, including
feature pieces appearing in publications ranging from the *New York
Times* to *Teen Vogue*, and her activism work has been featured in CNN's
series *[United Shades of America](#)*. In addition to writing, Wong
regularly creates multimedia content, including podcasts. From 2013 to
2015, she was a member of the National Council on Disability, appointed
by then president Barack Obama.

Wong founded and serves as the director of the Disability Visibility
Project (DVP), an online community that aims to create a space where
disability media and culture are recognized, created, and shared. The
project is personal for Wong, who has been unable to walk since
childhood. The DVP also provides an online place for people to share and
connect about disability culture. The organization encourages those
living with disabilities to share their stories through the website or
the app [StoryCorps](#), which collects and shares oral history. The DVP
curates "disabled media" from these collected oral histories in the form
of tweets, audio clips, podcasts, blog posts, images, and so on. The
project also publishes original written and multimedia content created
from the perspectives of people who are disabled. Topics include issues
related to ableism (discrimination against people with disabilities),
culture, and politics.

Wong is also the host and a coproducer of the [Disability Visibility
Project podcast](#), launched in 2017. She uses the podcast to give a
voice and platform to issues concerning politics and culture as they
relate to disability rights and social justice. Through conversations
with diverse guests, Wong amplifies disability media and culture on
topics ranging from health care to climate change to the arts, and
everything in between.

Wong has also partnered with [#CripTheVote](#), a nonpartisan campaign
to bring awareness of disability issues into the public and political
arenas, and [Access Is Love](#), an initiative to build accessibility
into everyday life. She is the editor of *Disability Visibility:
First-Person Stories from the Twenty-First Century*, an anthology of
personal stories from members of the disability community. The book
contains curated text such as blog posts, manifestos, eulogies, and
testimonies to Congress in order to bring to light the diverse
experiences of people in this community. The aim of the anthology is
intersectional, meaning it emphasizes the crossroads of living with
disabilities and other issues, including race, class, gender, culture,
and religion.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00003}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
