m00169

09ab503b-fd9e-4b34-96c1-f18f8baede1c

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Apply appropriate genre conventions for structure, tone, mechanics,
format, and design in writing speech.

Demonstrate relationships between ideas, patterns of organization, and
interplay of verbal and nonverbal elements.

Articulate how genre conventions are shaped and vary by purpose,
culture, and expectation.

Oral communication skills are integral to personal and professional
success. While many aspects of script writing are similar to those used
in writing for print or electronic formats, speech incorporates another
domain with its own considerations.

# Writing for Listeners and Readers {#sect-00002}

The script for a speech may begin as a traditional text, but it must be
written and delivered in a way that makes it available and accessible to
readers and listeners alike. Think of your favorite radio show or
podcast. If the author wrote as if composing a written text with no
consideration for listeners, the effect for listeners would likely be
compromised.

When writing for listeners, think about not only what you want to
express but also how you can best support your ideas and claims. Because
speech relies heavily on audience members' auditory skills, listeners
with little practice in these skills or who learn better through visual
or experiential text may be at a disadvantage. Therefore, the
speaker-writer must make a concerted effort to support listeners in
other ways.

# Writing for Delivery {#sect-00003}

Text for speech will be only as good as its delivery. If you write for
speech in the exact way you write an academic paper, the result is
likely to be lackluster, for speech is immediate---that is, it makes an
impact as soon as it is heard. A powerful written argument, if orally
delivered without voice modulation or emphasis, is unlikely to move
listeners and likely to have fluency glitches, as written sentences tend
to be longer and more complex. Although topical outlines for a paper and
a script might look similar, the way you translate ideas into writing
for speech will vary to increase effectiveness. One strategy for making
this "conversion" is to read your script aloud during or after writing.
Hearing the script will allow you to make revisons and edits to ensure
oral fluency, or smooth delivery, including pronunciation, phrasing,
stress, and tone.

You can write effectively for delivery by doing the following:

Support information by including visual and audio aids to help the
audience remember and understand information.

Demonstrate information through action, such as dynamic movement or
demonstrations.

Engage your audience with vocal techniques such as gestures, inflection,
changes in speed and pitch, and strategically placed pauses.

# Writing with Media {#sect-00004}

Script writing and presentations often take a multimedia approach.
Multimedia can include a variety of channels, media types, and visual
aids, including videos, images, infographics, and animations that
enhance understanding and bring a new level of engagement among media
consumers. The use of media can reinforce the content of a script or
presentation, provide a vehicle for delivery, and generally enhance the
speaker's purpose and message.

While formal speeches are still featured at contemporary political,
religious, and academic events, other forms of media have become
alternatives to traditional public addresses. Free and readily available
video platforms such as YouTube mean that more people than ever before
are able to share their experiences. Also free and readily accessible
for the most part, podcasts are increasingly used as a vehicle to share
ideas through an oral medium. Plus, podcasts such as [*Serial*](#) have
led to changes within the criminal justice system. Social media
platforms now are filled with multimedia, including video, audio, and
images, that play a more prominent role than at the time these platforms
first were launched. As you develop your presentation in the next
section of this chapter, consider which methods of presentation you
might explore in order to harness the power of media to your benefit.

# Key Terms {#sect-00005}

Below are key terms and characteristics of scripts and other oral media.

audience

:

the people for and to whom a script is written.

Body

:

the middle and main portion of a script, in which key ideas, evidence,
and reasons are presented and elaborated.

Citation

:

credit given to a source used in a writer's research.

Conclusion

:

the final portion of a script, in which the thesis and key ideas are
reiterated and/or expanded to include action or additional
consideration.

ethos

:

appeal to readers'/listeners' ethics, establishing authority and
credibility.

Evidence

:

information, such as facts, statistics, and examples, that proves or
disproves the validity of a key idea.

Introduction

:

the first portion of a script, in which the author engages the audience
and usually states the thesis.

Logos

:

appeal to readers'/listeners' logic, or reasoning.

Parallelism

:

a rhetorical technique of using similar words, phrases, or other
grammatical constructions to connect related ideas, emphasize a point,
or add rhythm.

Pathos

:

appeal to readers'/listeners' emotions.

purpose

:

a writer's reason for creating a script, often to persuade
readers/listeners to agree with a viewpoint or take action.

reasoning

:

logical and sensible explanation of a concept.

Repetition

:

a rhetorical technique of repeating a key word or phrase for emphasis.

Rhetorical appeals

:

methods of persuasion, including ethos, logos, and pathos.

Rhetorical devices

:

ways that writers use language to convey meaning, create emphasis, and
draw attention to their words and ideas. Repetition and parallelism are
rhetorical devices.

Signpost language

:

statements that help the audience know where your presentation is going.
Transitions are examples of signpost language.

Topic

:

the subject of a script.

Thesis

:

a statement indicating a writer's/speaker's position on the topic.
