m00170

fea7e4e0-3494-4ae4-ad37-4fe52141d381

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain how conventions of writing, including rhetorical devices,
reflect purpose, culture, or audience expectations.

Analyze the relationships between ideas and patterns of organization in
a speech.

# Introduction {#sect-00002}

A script may take many forms, but effective speakers connect with their
audience, clearly state a main idea or thesis, and support that thesis
by backing up key ideas with evidence and reasoning. In this feature,
you will read a speech that examines whether U.S. Department of
Transportation regulations discriminate against people who depend on
service animals. The full transcript of the speech, rather than the
outline, is provided here to allow you to study aspects of delivery as
well as preparation. Notice not only the disapproving tone and
conversational style but also the way in which the author builds and
supports the thesis.

# It\'s a Dog Fight {#sect-00003}

Several years ago, I sat in the waiting area of a major airport, trying
to ignore the constant yapping of a small, clearly agitated dog being
restrained with difficulty on the lap of a fellow passenger. An airline
rep approached the passenger and asked the only two questions allowed by
law: "Is that a service animal? What service does it provide for you?"

"Yes. It keeps me from having panic attacks," the woman said defiantly,
and the airline employee retreated.

Shortly after that, another passenger arrived at the gate. She gripped
the high, stiff handle on the harness of a Labrador retriever that wore
a vest emblazoned with the words "The Seeing Eye." Without warning, the
smaller dog launched itself from its owner's lap, snarling and snapping
at the guide dog. The owner of the small dog jumped up and retrieved her
animal from the Labrador's vest and stomped back to her seat. That
neither she nor the still-yapping dog had an obvious panic attack amazed
me, as I questioned, to myself of course, what service was being
provided---other than a moment of exercise for the woman and her dog.

Introduction. *The opening anecdote grabs the listener's attention with
a relatable story about an interaction at an airport. It provides an
illustration of the point that Zain A. Kumar will make next in the
introduction.*

Pathos. *Using strong words such as* snarling *and* snapping*,* *Kumar
connects his argument to emotions.*

Tone. *Kumar clearly expresses disapproval of the small dog and its
owner, implying that the woman is lying and the dog is untrained.*

The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) has recently established new
regulations regarding service animals on domestic and international
flights. This regulation has provoked a flurry of protests by people who
are accustomed to taking their pets for free in airplane cabins by
claiming they are emotional support animals. Are these new regulations
discriminating against persons with disabilities? Let's look at some
details.

Signpost Language. *Kumar uses a rhetorical question, or a question used
for effect and not meant to be answered, to establish the central
discussion in the script: whether restrictions put in place for service
animals infringe on the rights of people with disabilities. This
signpost language tells listeners that this is important information.*

Introduction. *Following the anecdote, this introductory paragraph
establishes the problem and provides background information.*

Tone. *Kumar's use of rhetorical questions and phrases such as* Let's
look at *creates an informal, conversational tone that is well suited to
script.*

The new rule has 12 provisions. The first is the definition: a service
animal is a dog that is individually trained to do work or perform tasks
for the benefit of a person with a disability.

Definition. *The definition of a service animal provides context for the
focus of the script.*

Okay, how was the service dog trained? Well, as a puppy it lived with a
foster family that taught it basic behavior and socialization. When it
was between 13 and 19 months old, it came to the Seeing Eye campus to
work with an individual instructor for four months of intensive
training. At the end of the four months, the dog took a final exam:
leading the instructor successfully on a field trip to New York City.
About 75 percent of the dogs pass this training and are matched with a
person who is blind or visually impaired. The new owner works with the
dog and its instructor for an additional 25 days on campus before the
owner and the dog go home. But the training doesn't end there. The new
owner continually reinforces the dog with praise and correction, and The
Seeing Eye staff members are always available for telephone
consultations and even home visits if needed.

Tone. *The question opening the paragraph contributes to the
conversational tone of the script.*

Evidence. *This paragraph firmly establishes the "credibility" of the
guide dog, detailing its training. This rigorous process will be
contrasted with the background of the emotional support dog from the
opening anecdote to draw a comparison.*

Now, what about that emotional support dog in the airport? The law
requires no specific training for emotional support animals. The
rationale is that their presence is enough to support people who have
anxiety, depression, or stress. The only requirement is that the animal
be manageable in public and not create a nuisance. In light of this
requirement, the little dog did not do well.

Evidence. *This paragraph contrasts the guide dog with the emotional
support dog and shows that the latter cannot meet even the minimum
standard set by the airlines.*

The second provision of the new DOT regulation is that emotional support
animals are no longer considered service animals. However, the third
provision grants psychiatric service animals the same status as other
service animals. In other words, a person with an emotional or
psychiatric disability can still obtain and travel with a service
companion that has appropriate documentation.

Transition. *This signpost language allows the listener to know that the
author is moving from one key idea to another.*

Three other regulations deal with this documentation. The DOT has
developed forms attesting to the animal's health, behavior, and
training. Airlines may require these to be submitted 48 hours before
travel or may require them at the departure gate. Providing these forms
is no problem for a passenger with a Seeing Eye--certified or other
officially trained dog.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

But what about the certification for an emotional support animal? Until
the new regulations were passed, this wasn't a problem. A person wishing
to claim a pet as an emotional support animal could simply go online and
purchase certification from a for-profit agency. On one such site, for
\$54, a basic kit offers lifetime registration in a national database
maintained by the company, plus a framed certificate, ID card with leash
clip, and two official-looking vest patches. "Deluxe" and "premium"
packages added more goodies for \$114 and \$154, respectively. The
applicant could also obtain a certification letter from a licensed
mental health professional for an additional fee. Just out of curiosity,
I took the free online assessment---10 multiple-choice questions like
these: "In the past two weeks, how often have you had little interest or
pleasure in doing things that you usually like to do?" "How often have
you felt sad or depressed?" "How often have you felt worried, anxious,
or on edge?" The multiple choice options were *never*, *sometimes*, or
*often*; I replied with 5 *often*, 4 *sometimes*, and 1 *never*
response. My results were immediate: "Congratulations! Based on your
responses, you are a good candidate to qualify for an ESA." All that was
left for me to do was fill in my credit card info and upload a photo of
my pet to have a certified emotional support animal. This certification,
by the way, must be renewed annually---for a fee. Big surprise!

Supporting Evidence. *Though it has not yet been expressly stated,
audience members should have a sense of the thesis. This anecdote serves
as evidence that Kumar will use to support the claim that regulations
are not discriminatory.*

Tone. *The sarcastic words "Big surprise!" reflect Kumar's disapproval
of the for-profit agency issuing certification for service animals.*

Additional DOT regulations allow airlines to require that service
animals be harnessed, leashed, or tethered at all times in the airport
and on the aircraft and to limit a single passenger to two service
animals. The regulations also allow airlines to require a service animal
to fit within its handler's foot space on the aircraft. This is not a
hardship; I have personally seen a full-grown Labrador tuck herself
comfortably into the space for carry-ons and go to sleep.

Personal Anecdote. *Kumar frequently uses personal anecdotes to support
his points and establish credibility on the subject.*

The bottom line? I don't believe the DOT's new regulations are
discriminatory.

Thesis. *Although the structure is unusual, Kumar finally states the
thesis: the new regulations do not discriminate against persons with
disabilities.*

Developed after receiving over 15,000 comments from individuals with
disabilities; airline and airport personnel, including flight
attendants; and other members of the public, these restrictions close
loopholes that have been exploited by pet owners who want to take their
pets along in airplane cabins without using a pet carrier or paying the
pet fee. Individuals with a genuine need can still be accompanied by
their documented and trained service animals---including psychiatric
service animals---when they travel. In fact, travel just became less
challenging in one major respect: people no longer have to abide fake
emotional support animals having fuzzy four-footed panic attacks during
the trip.

Logos. *Kumar uses logical appeals to support the thesis, talking
through points in an organized and rational manner.*

Reasoning. *Drawing on previous anecdotes, evidence, and explanations,
Kumar explains why the new regulations do not discriminate against
people with real disabilities.*

Parallel Conclusion. *Kumar concludes the speech in the same casual
manner and tone as the rest of the script. In addition, the ending is
meaningful, once again drawing in the reader's/listener's attention by
circling back to the opening anecdote.*

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00004}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
