m00171

2c6b2aec-f957-407d-887b-f236dece845a

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Develop a writing project through multiple drafts.

Compose texts that use rhetorical concepts appropriately in a speech.

Apply effective shifts in voice, diction, tone, formality, design,
medium, and structure.

Demonstrate orality as an aspect of culture.

Provide and act on productive feedback to works in progress through the
collaborative and social aspects of the writing process.

Adapt composing processes for a variety of technologies and modalities.

Now it's time to try your hand at writing a script or speaking outline
for a public audience. Decide on a topic, and take that topic through
the planning, drafting, and revision processes. Remember that even the
informal writing you do when planning a script or speaking outline is
recursive, meaning it is not linear. You will probably go back and forth
between sections and processes.

You may question of the wisdom of preparation before speaking to the
public. After all, you may post regularly to social media, for example,
without following the processes of drafting and revising. However,
"winging it" when it comes to speech is not a wise strategy. As a genre,
social media in particular lends itself to short and simple messaging.
Viewers allow producers very little time and attention before clicking
to view the next item. Some sources say that you have 10 seconds to get
the attention of a viewer; by the one-minute mark, you may have lost up
to 45 percent of your viewers. Live adult audiences will pay attention
for about 20 minute increments before their minds begin to wander; for
young audiences, the time is even less. Given that knowledge, you must
craft your message accordingly.

# Summary of Assignment: Writing to Speak, Speaking to Act {#sect-00002}

You may have heard that merely believing in a cause is not enough; you
must take action to create change. As you keep the idea of social,
political, or economic change in mind, your task is to develop an
outline as the basis for a speech to a live audience or on a social
media platform of your choice. The topic is an issue you care about.
Speaking from an outline rather than from a written script helps ensure
that your speech is natural and smooth. Your audience should not feel as
though you are reading aloud to them. If you are free to choose your own
topic, consider a cause meaningful to you, or consider using one of the
following suggestions as your topic or as inspiration for it:

Police and mental health services reform

Standards-based reform in education

Global human rights

Liberty and justice for all

Reduction of carbon emissions

Your speech may incorporate multimedia components as you see fit. You'll
also need to plan how to access the audience or platform you have in
mind.

As you craft your outline, keep in mind your audience, your purpose for
addressing them, and your support for that purpose by using key ideas,
reasons, and evidence. When planning your script, use an organizer to
collect information so that you can support your ideas credibly with a
well-developed argument.

## Using Your Authentic Voice {#sect-00003}

Unlike most formal academic papers, oral presentations give you an
opportunity to consider how you might challenge formal writing
conventions by delivering your script in your authentic voice. Oral
compositions offer an opportunity to bring through conventions of your
own culture, perhaps including discursive patterns of language and
grammar and challenges to standard language ideologies. As always, keep
your audience and purpose in mind as you make choices about your use of
language.

## Researching and Narrowing the Topic {#sect-00004}

After choosing the overall subject of your script, research the general
topic to learn about context, background information, and related
issues. Then narrow the topic and focus your research, as guided by your
working thesis and purpose. You can return to [Argumentative Research:
Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with Evidence](#), [Research Process:
Accessing and Recording Information](#), and [Annotated Bibliography:
Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources](#) to review research
processes, including how to allow research to shape your thesis and
organization.

After choosing a topic, you will probably need to narrow it further. One
way to achieve this task is by brainstorming, which involves generating
possible ideas and thoughts quickly and informally. A basic, fast-paced
brainstorming technique is simply to list all your possible ideas on
paper and combine those that are related. Then you can eliminate some
ideas to narrow the range. For example, for this assignment, you might
list all of the causes toward which you feel sympathetic. Beginning with
an idea that already interests you will help you remain enthusiastic
about the idea and generate a positive tone that will come across to the
audience and maximize the effectiveness of the presentation.

For example, if you're interested in the environment, your brainstorm
might include the following:

Animal endangerment

Deforestation

Ocean pollution

Plastic waste

Rising carbon levels

Global warming

If you think you still need new ideas at this point, spend some time
researching advocacy organizations. Next, expand each idea by creating
subtopics. This activity will help you eliminate topics that are
difficult to elaborate on---or at least you will know that you need to
conduct more research. In summary, follow this process as you choose and
narrow your topic:

Brainstorm ideas that already interest you or with which you have
experience.

Circle topics appropriate for the assignment.

Cross out topics that you think you cannot make relevant to the
audience. Remember, you are developing a presentation for a public
forum.

For remaining topics, flesh out subtopics with ideas you might cover in
your script. You should have between two and five key ideas; three is
fairly typical.

Eliminate topics for which you lack sufficient material, or do the
necessary research to obtain more.

Finally, decide on a topic that you have the resources to research.

Another Lens. Because this chapter focuses on activism and you have read
the Trailblazer feature about Alice Wong's work in the disability
activism space, think about content consumers (readers, listeners) who
experience the world through the lens of disability. Challenge yourself
to create content that meets the needs of diverse consumers. Because the
assignment is an activist script outline for a presentation, it
naturally lends itself to those who are abled in the areas of sight and
hearing. Consider people who are visually impaired or hard of hearing.
*How might you adapt your script and its delivery to make it accessible
to all?*

One option to consider is visual representation of your presentation
through an infographic that depicts the thesis, main reasoning, and
evidence to reach those who cannot hear a speech. Or consider how you
might adapt the delivery of a script to reach those who experience
visual limitations. By making considerations for accessibility, you will
strengthen your message for all who interact with it.

# Outlining {#sect-00005}

Before your presentation, create an outline of the main ideas you plan
to discuss. An outline is a framework that helps you organize your major
claims, reasoning, supporting details, and evidence. Creating an outline
is also a way to create a natural flow for your ideas and provide a
foundation for engaging your audience. Doing this basic organizational
work at the beginning will help you present your ideas so that they will
have the greatest impact on your audience.

The first step in creating your outline is to develop a purpose
statement. This one-sentence statement reveals what you hope to
accomplish in the presentation---that is, your objective. The purpose
statement isn't something that you will include in your actual
presentation; the purpose statement is for you. It will help you keep
your audience at the center of your script, create a central idea, and,
most of all, give you a realistic goal. One example of a purpose
statement for an informational speech might read, "By the end of this
presentation, my audience will better understand the impact of plastic
waste on the ocean and the world." Or, for a persuasive speech, a
purpose statement on a similar topic might read, "By the end of this
presentation, my audience will feel compelled to reduce their use of
disposable plastic."

Although a speaking outline resembles an outline for an academic paper,
with special considerations for the genre, it does not need to be as
detailed as an outline for a research paper. Rather, a speaking outline
will form the framework for speech. Feel free to write your outline as
complete thoughts, sentence fragments, or even bullet points.

A presentation's basic format is relatively similar to most other
writing: an introduction, three to five major supporting points, and a
conclusion. The major differences will be the genre-specific choices you
make about presenting this information.

## Introduction {#sect-00006}

Like most persuasive writing, your presentation needs an introduction
that establishes its purpose. The introduction should engage the
audience, present the topic and main ideas, and validate the speaker's
credibility. Engaging your audience is important. You can capture an
audience's attention by relating an anecdote or a quotation, posing a
question, using humor, relating surprising facts or statistics, or any
other method you think will do the job.

The introduction will usually lead seamlessly into a definitive
statement of the main theme or claim. As you would include a thesis in
the introduction of a piece of persuasive writing, your introduction
here also should include a statement that previews the main idea and
briefly touches on key points. Though you are outlining your
presentation rather than writing a full script, it is a good idea to
write your thesis so that you clearly identify your aim. When
presenting, you won't have to read your script word for word, but
recording the thesis clearly will enable you to summarize the central
idea of your presentation easily.

Finally, the introduction is your opportunity to establish credibility
with your audience and to tell them why they should listen to what you
have to say. Include a brief statement of your credentials, experience,
and knowledge that demonstrates your credibility or authority on the
topic.

## Body {#sect-00007}

The main section of the outline, the body is the longest part of the
script and the one in which you present key points to support the main
idea. Each key point should stem organically from the script's goal and
your thesis. Although standard practice is to present three key ideas,
you may choose to have between two and five. Any fewer, and you won't
support your thesis sufficiently; any more, and your audience will lose
track of them. Back each key idea with several points, including
reasoning, evidence, and audiovisual support.

You can organize your key ideas in several ways. Determining an
organizational pattern helps you narrow the central ideas generated from
research and allows you to plan material for your script. Topical
patterns break main ideas into smaller ideas or subcategories. After
dividing the topics into subtopics, consider the most logical order of
points. There is often no right answer to this order, so feel free to
move your ideas around to create the greatest impact. For example, a
topic discussing World War II battles might best be presented in
chronological order (listed or arranged according to time sequence), but
a topic broken down to address the causes of World War II (diplomatic
factors, nationalism, World War I peace treaty) may not fit into an
obvious pattern. In a persuasive script, problem-and-solution or
cause-and-effect patterns of reasoning may be the best way to organize
ideas. These and other organizational patterns are discussed in
[Reasoning Strategies: Improving Critical Thinking](#).

## Conclusion {#sect-00008}

This portion of the script provides a summary and is your final
opportunity to make an impression on your audience. Typically, in this
section, you restate the thesis convincingly and, if applicable in a
persuasive script, tell your audience what you believe they should do.
Also, you briefly revisit each key idea in the context of how it
supports your thesis. Strong conclusions are especially important in
scripts.

One strategy for writing conclusions is the "mirrored" conclusion that
ties back to the introduction. For example, if you use a statistic to
engage your audience's attention, you return to that statistic in the
conclusion. Consider the following example.

Introduction: It takes 450 years for one plastic bottle to decompose in
a landfill. Now consider the fact that, according to the U.S.
government, at least *50 million* plastic bottles are thrown away *each
day* in the United States.

Mirrored Conclusion: Each time you're tempted to reach for a plastic
bottle, contemplate the *50 million* that end up in landfills each year.
Consider other options that spare our environment from the centuries of
decomposition that each one contributes to.

For writers who have difficulty beginning, one idea is to
reverse-engineer the structure of the script. Beginning with the
conclusion will help you know where you need to end up, thus making it
easier to create a roadmap for getting there. This strategy can provide
consistency and add emphasis to the key ideas in the script.

## Outline {#sect-00009}

Keeping in mind the basic parts of a script outline, you can now begin
to craft a skeletal version your own. Use a graphic organizer like
[\#](#) to gather and organize your initial thoughts.

+-----------------+----------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| *Topic:*        | *General Purpose:*         | *Purpose Statement:*              |
|                 |                            |                                   |
|                 |                            |                                   |
+-----------------+----------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| *Introduction*  | Hook:                                                          |
|                 |                                                                |
|                 |                                                                |
|                 +----------------------------------------------------------------+
|                 | Thesis:                                                        |
|                 |                                                                |
|                 |                                                                |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| *Body*          | Key Idea 1:                                                    |
|                 |                                                                |
|                 | Reason(s): Evidence:                                           |
|                 +----------------------------------------------------------------+
|                 | Key Idea 2:                                                    |
|                 |                                                                |
|                 | Reason(s): Evidence:                                           |
|                 +----------------------------------------------------------------+
|                 | Key Idea 3:                                                    |
|                 |                                                                |
|                 | Reason(s): Evidence:                                           |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| *Conclusion*    | Restatement of Thesis:                                         |
|                 |                                                                |
|                 |                                                                |
|                 +----------------------------------------------------------------+
|                 | Closing Statement:                                             |
|                 |                                                                |
|                 |                                                                |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------------------+

: Presentation outline {#table-00001}

A sample skeletal outline might include the following information.

+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
| *Topic:*       | *General Purpose:*       | *Purpose Statement:*     |
|                |                          |                          |
| Plastic waste  | To convince people not   | By the end of this       |
|                | to use plastic water     | speech, my audience will |
|                | bottles.                 | feel compelled to reduce |
|                |                          | their use of disposable  |
|                |                          | plastic.                 |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+
| *Introduction* | Hook:                                               |
|                |                                                     |
|                | It takes 450 years for one plastic bottle to        |
|                | decompose in a landfill. Now consider the fact      |
|                | that, according to the U.S. government, at least    |
|                | *50 million* plastic bottles are thrown away *each  |
|                | day* in the United States.                          |
|                +-----------------------------------------------------+
|                | Thesis:                                             |
|                |                                                     |
|                | We should reduce our use of disposable plastic.     |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Body*         | Key Idea 1: Plastic production increases carbon     |
|                | emissions and contributes to global warming.        |
|                |                                                     |
|                | Reason(s): Plastic production requires a lot of     |
|                | energy and resources. Evidence: *1.5 million        |
|                | barrels of oil are used each year to make plastic   |
|                | bottles.*                                           |
|                +-----------------------------------------------------+
|                | Key Idea 2: Most plastic is never recycled.         |
|                |                                                     |
|                | Reason(s): Recycling plastic is not efficient.      |
|                | Evidence: *Only 9% of plastic ever produced has     |
|                | been recycled.*                                     |
|                +-----------------------------------------------------+
|                | Key Idea 3: Plastic waste is filling our landfills. |
|                |                                                     |
|                | Reason(s): Plastic manufacturing is increasing, and |
|                | there is nowhere to put all the used plastic.       |
|                | Evidence: *40% of plastic is single-use then thrown |
|                | away.*                                              |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| *Conclusion*   | Restatement of Thesis:                              |
|                |                                                     |
|                | All people should reduce their use of disposable    |
|                | plastic.                                            |
|                +--------------------------+--------------------------+
|                | Closing Statement:       |                          |
|                |                          |                          |
|                | Each time you're tempted |                          |
|                | to reach for a plastic   |                          |
|                | bottle, contemplate the  |                          |
|                | 50 million that end up   |                          |
|                | in landfills each year.  |                          |
|                | Consider other options   |                          |
|                | that spare our           |                          |
|                | environment from the     |                          |
|                | centuries of             |                          |
|                | decomposition that each  |                          |
|                | one contributes to.      |                          |
+----------------+--------------------------+--------------------------+

: Sample outline {#table-00002}

# Signpost Language; Tone, Repetition and Parallelism; Media and Other Visuals; and Cultural Cues {#sect-00010}

After you have analyzed your audience, selected and narrowed the topic,
researched supporting ideas, and created a skeletal outline, you can
begin adding flesh to the outline. Gather all supporting material for
your topic, and consider the various ways to include notes about
effective language and delivery.

## Signpost Language {#sect-00011}

The function of signs is to direct people to the places they are going.
Think of a road sign that points to an exit off the highway. Signs also
can warn people of places they should *not* go. Similarly, in
presentations, signposts are statements that help the audience know
where your presentation is going. These may include

a

preview statement

that offers an overview of the path and topics your script will take on;

transition statements

between the introduction and body, between key points and ideas, and
between the body and the conclusion; and

a

conclusion statement

that ends the script.

[\#](#) shows examples of signpost language. Notice the boldfaced words,
called transitions, which help readers and listeners navigate between
ideas and concepts. Signposts should clearly connect ideas, are often
parallel (repeated words or grammatical forms), and mark the most
important parts of an argument or explanation.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  *Signpost*              *Example*
  ----------------------- -----------------------------------------------
  Preview                 "*Today, I'd like to introduce you* to the
                          organization ReStart, a community outreach that
                          makes a difference for those experiencing
                          homelessness in our community."

  Transition              "*First*, let's look at how ReStart was
  (introduction to body)  formed."

  Transition (key idea to "*Let's begin* by examining the reasons some
  key idea)               people experience homelessness, which can help
                          you understand the need for an organization
                          like ReStart."

  Transition (key idea to "*Now that you understand* something about
  key idea)               homelessness, let's look at how ReStart
                          addresses the problem."

  Transition (key idea to "*It's not just* the staff at ReStart that can
  key idea)               help. You can play a role in helping those
                          experiencing homelessness too."

  Conclusion (restatement "*Thus, as you can see*, ReStart is an
  of thesis)              organization with a long history in the Kansas
                          City area, one that not only provides services
                          to those experiencing homelessness but also
                          offers an opportunity for volunteers to play a
                          role."
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Signpost language {#table-00003}

## Tone {#sect-00012}

Tone is a writer or speaker's attitude as it is conveyed in a
composition or script. A writers or speaker's language choices as well
as other elements specific to speech, such as gestures and body
language, help create tone. The tone of a presentation depends largely
on its purpose, audience, and message.

Consider this text from [Annotated Student Sample](#).

Without warning, the smaller dog launched itself from its owner's lap,
snarling and snapping at the guide dog. The owner of the small dog
jumped up and retrieved her animal from the Labrador's vest and stomped
back to her seat. That neither she nor the still-yapping dog had an
obvious panic attack amazed me, as I questioned, to myself of course,
what possible service was being provided---other than a moment of
exercise.

The author's tone of disapproval is evident when he relates the actions
of the untrained, unrestrained dog causing trouble for others. The
attitude is emphasized by words with negative connotations such as
*snarling* and *stomped*.

The tone you choose for your script will help you relate to your
audience. It can help your audience feel connected to you and promote
your credibility as well as that of the message you wish to impart.

Notice, too, the use of the first person in script writing. While you
may have been taught not to use first-person pronouns in most formal or
academic writing, speech is completely different. Even in formal
scripts, the use of *I* helps connect listeners to the speaker. In
general, effective speakers also use simple, declarative statements in
the active voice (subject + verb + object) to emphasize their key ideas
and to keep audiences focused on them. Longer, complex sentences may
cause audience members to lose focus. Thoughts and sentences should flow
conversationally. See [Clear and Effective Sentences](#) for more about
effective sentences, including use of the active voice.

## Repetition and Parallelism {#sect-00013}

Repetition and parallelism are literary devices that authors and
speakers use for emphasis, persuasion, contrast, and rhythm. In
repetition, a word, phrase, or sound is repeated for effect. Repetition
is also employed in a variety of figurative language. The following
example is an excerpt from the surrender speech of Chief Joseph
(1840--1904), the Nez Percé leader who surrendered to the U.S. Army in
1877 after the U.S. government had appropriated Nez Percé land. Rather
than be forced to live on reservations, Chief Joseph and his followers
unsuccessfully attempted to flee to Canada, a journey of about 1,500
miles, during which they were pursued and vastly outnumbered by the U.S.
Army. Notice the use of repetition to emphasize the cold and the death
toll.

I am tired of fighting. Our chiefs are killed; Looking Glass is *dead*,
Too-hul-hul-sote is *dead.* The old men are all *dead*. . . . He who led
on the young men is *dead*. It is *cold*, and we have no blankets; the
little children are *freezing to death*. My people, some of them, have
run away to the hills and have no blankets, no food. No one knows where
they are---perhaps *freezing to death*. I want to have time to look for
my children. . . . Maybe I shall find them among the *dead*.

Parallelism is the use of similar or equivalent constructions of phrases
or clauses to emphasize an idea. Parallelism is especially helpful for
organizational and structural concerns in a script or composition.
Consider this excerpt from President John F. Kennedy's (1917--1963)
inaugural address:

Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall
*pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend,
oppose any foe* in order to assure the survival and the success of
liberty.

Kennedy uses parallelism for impact as well as to organize his support
for the idea that the United States works collaboratively for "the
success of liberty." Parallelism and repetition can work hand in hand as
organizational strategies and to emphasize ideas in your script.

Anaphora and epistrophe are two related forms of parallelism.

+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| *Anaphora:* repetition of the    | "*We shall fight* on the         |
| first word or phrase across      | beaches, *we shall fight* on the |
| phrases or sentences             | landing grounds, *we shall       |
|                                  | fight* in the fields and in the  |
|                                  | streets, *we shall fight* in the |
|                                  | hills."                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ---Winston Churchill's "We Shall |
|                                  | Fight on the Beaches"            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| *Epistrophe:* repetition of the  | "And that the government of *the |
| last word or phrase across       | people*, by *the people*, for    |
| phrases or sentences             | *the people*, shall not perish   |
|                                  | from the Earth."                 |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ---Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg  |
|                                  | Address                          |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | "For man holds in his mortal     |
|                                  | hands the power to abolish *all  |
|                                  | forms of human poverty* and *all |
|                                  | forms of human life*."           |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | ---John F. Kennedy's inaugural   |
|                                  | address                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

You can hear examples of parallelism and repetition in audio excerpts on
the website [American Rhetoric](#).

In Chapter 19, you have learned about rhetorical techniques used in
speech, including parallelism, repetition, and signpost language.

## Media and Other Visuals {#sect-00014}

Because speeches are auditory by nature, you can enhance their
effectiveness by using media and other visual aids. These elements can
add emphasis, help the audience understand a complex idea, or otherwise
support your message. But be careful not to detract from your speech
with the media you choose. A common error speakers make is to include
too much or irrelevant media.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

When considering media and visual aids, remember to keep in mind your
audience, purpose, and message. Note these considerations about media
and visual aids:

Use media in a way that doesn't clutter or overwhelm your presentation.
The media you choose should enhance, not detract from, your message.

Ensure that visuals are large enough for the audience to see. Create or
obtain media that is clear, concise, and of high quality. Tiny,
hard-to-read graphs or muffled audio clips will only frustrate your
audience.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Keep a consistent visual style, including font, colors, backgrounds, and
so on.

Provide space and time for your audience to listen to, read, and/or view
media and other visuals in your presentation.

Consider accessibility; think about an audience member who relies on an
interpreter or who is visually impaired.

How can you make your presentation accessible to that person?

Ensure that your media engages the audience, thus making your speech
delivery more dynamic.

If using technology, make every effort to test it before your
presentation.

## Read Aloud {#sect-00015}

As you finish drafting your script, consider all the potential aspects
of language and organization you might use to create meaning for your
audience. Remember that you will give your presentation orally.
Therefore, during drafting, take a few minutes at key points---after
completing a section, for example---to practice your presentation by
reading it aloud. Listen to how it sounds and make adjustments as you go
along, considering the oral elements of speech that lend themselves to
fluency.

# Using Symbols {#sect-00016}

After you have completed the first draft of your outline, peer review
can help you refine your ideas, improve your organization, and
strengthen your language. One aspect of effective peer review is marking
the text for revision. You and your peers can do this kind of marking by
using symbols, which allow reviewers to give feedback quickly and
thoughtfully without overwhelming the writer with notes.

[\#](#) below provides some of the editing marks to use for proofreading
and review. Peer reviewers may also write in the margin to indicate
issues with organization, tone, or flow of ideas.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

# Interpreting and Responding to Symbols and Context Cues {#sect-00017}

After a peer has reviewed and provided feedback on your first draft, you
will begin the revision process. Remember that writing is recursive,
meaning it is not linear. Although revision won't go on forever, it's
important to revise your work at each point in the writing process. In
fact, even though you are officially working with the first draft, it is
likely your writing has already undergone some process of revision. You
will want to continue this process to strengthen your writing, respond
to peer review, and ensure that your script fulfills your intent.
Consider the items in the following checklist.

# Checklist for Revision {#sect-00018}

□ Read the draft aloud.

Is it organized logically?

Is the topic immediately clear?

□ Ensure that the script has a clear purpose.

□ Think about your audience.

Does the script respond to what the audience already knows about the
subject?

Does it support new knowledge?

Have you taken culture into consideration?

□ Review the introduction to determine whether it hooks the audience and
establishes a thesis.

□ Review the sentences in each paragraph and the order of the paragraphs
to ensure that the organization supports the thesis.

□ Review the conclusion to ensure that it supports the thesis and
provides a strong ending.

□ Read the script again after making revisions to find ways to improve
transitions and connections. Consider tone, signpost language,
parallelism, and repetition.

□ Review the draft for conventions, including grammar, spelling, and
punctuation.
