m00173

ef4a1ae1-357a-4aeb-981b-4076452afbf0

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Implement various technologies effectively to address an audience,
matching the capacities of each to the rhetorical situation.

Apply conventions of speech delivery, such as voice control, gestures,
and posture.

Identify and show awareness of cultural considerations.

Think of a speech you have seen or heard, either in person, on
television, or online. Was the speech delivered well, or was it poorly
executed? What aspects of the performance make you say that? Both good
and poor delivery of a speech can affect the audience's opinion of the
speaker and the topic. Poor delivery may be so distracting that even the
message of a well-organized script with strong information is lost to
the audience.

# Speaking Genres: Spoken Word, Pulpit, YouTube, Podcast, Social Media {#sect-00002}

The world today offers many new (and old) delivery methods for script
writing. While the traditional presidential address or commencement
speech on a stage in front of a crowd of people is unlikely to
disappear, newer script delivery methods are now available, including
many that involve technology. From YouTube, which allows anyone to
upload videos, to podcasts, which provide a platform for anyone,
celebrities and noncelebrities alike, to produce a radio-like program,
it seems that people are finding new ways to use technology to enhance
communication. Free resources such as [YouTube Studio](#) and the
extension [TubeBuddy](#) can be a good starting place to learn to create
these types of media.

## Voice Control {#sect-00003}

Whether the method is old or new, delivering communication in the
speaking genre relies not only on words but also on the way those words
are delivered. Remember that voice and tone are important in
establishing a bond with your audience, helping them feel connected to
your message, creating engagement, and facilitating comprehension. Vocal
delivery includes these aspects of speech:

Rate of speech

refers to how fast or slow you speak. You must speak slowly enough to be
understood but not so slowly that you sound unnatural and bore your
audience. In addition, you can vary your rate, speeding up or slowing
down to increase tension, emphasize a point, or create a dramatic
effect.

Volume

refers to how loudly or softly you speak. As with rate, you do not want
to be too loud or too soft. Too soft, and your speech will be difficult
or impossible to hear, even with amplification; too loud, and it will be
distracting or even painful for the audience. Ideally, you should
project your voice, speaking from the diaphragm, according to the size
and location of the audience and the acoustics of the room. You can also
use volume for effect; you might use a softer voice to describe a tender
moment between mother and child or a louder voice to emphatically
discuss an injustice.

Pitch

refers to how high or low a speaker's voice is to listeners. A person's
vocal pitch is unique to that person, and unlike the control a speaker
has over rate and volume, some physical limitations exist on the extent
to which individuals can vary pitch. Although men generally have
lower-pitched voices than women, speakers can vary their pitch for
emphasis. For example, you probably raise your pitch naturally at the
end of a question. Changing pitch can also communicate enthusiasm or
indicate transition or closure.

Articulation

refers to how clearly a person produces sounds. Clarity of voice is
important in speech; it determines how well your audience understands
what you are saying. Poor articulation can hamper the effect of your
script and even cause your audience to feel disconnected from both you
and your message. In general, articulation during a presentation before
an audience tends to be more pronounced and dramatic than everyday
communication with individuals or small groups. When presenting a
script, avoid slurring and mumbling. While these may be acceptable in
informal communication, in presented speech they can obscure your
message.

Fluency

refers to the flow of speech. Speaking with fluency is similar to
reading with fluency. It's not about how fast you can speak, but how
fluid and meaningful your speech is. While inserting pauses for dramatic
effect is perfectly acceptable, these are noticeably different from
awkward pauses that result from forgetting a point, losing your place,
or becoming distracted. Practicing your speech can greatly reduce
fluency issues. A word on

verbal fillers

, those pesky words or sounds used to fill a gap or fluency glitch:
utterances such as

um

,

ah

, and

like

detract from the fluency of your speech, distract the audience from your
point, and can even reduce your credibility. Again, practice can help
reduce their occurrence, and self-awareness can help you speak with more
fluency.

## Gestures and Expressions {#sect-00004}

Beyond vocal delivery, consider also physical delivery variables such as
gestures and facial expressions. While not all speech affords audiences
the ability to see the speaker, in-person, online, and other forms of
speech do. Gestures and facial expressions can both add to and detract
from effective script delivery, as they can help demonstrate emotion and
enthusiasm for the topic. Both have the ability to emphasize points,
enhance tone, and engage audiences.

Eye contact is another form of nonverbal, physical communication that
builds community, communicates comfort, and establishes credibility. Eye
contact also can help hold an audience's attention during a speech. It
is advisable to begin your speech by establishing eye contact with the
audience. One idea is to memorize your opening and closing statements to
allow you to maintain consistent eye contact during these important
sections of the script and strengthen your connection with the audience.

Although natural engagement through gestures, facial expressions, and
eye contact can help an audience relate to a presenter and even help
establish community and trust, these actions also can distract audiences
from the content of the script if not used purposefully. In general, as
with most delivery elements, variation and a happy medium between "too
much" and "too little" are key to an effective presentation. Some
presenters naturally have more expressive faces, but all people can
learn to control and use facial expressions and gestures consciously to
become more effective speakers. Practicing your speech in front of a
mirror will allow you to monitor, plan, and practice these aspects of
physical delivery.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Posture and Movement {#sect-00005}

Other physical delivery considerations include posture and movement.
Posture is the position of the body. If you have ever been pestered to
"stand up straight," you were being instructed on your posture. The most
important consideration for posture during a speech is that you look
relaxed and natural. You don't want to be slumped over and leaning on
the podium or lectern, but you also don't want a stiff, unnatural
posture that makes you look stilted or uncomfortable. In many speeches,
the speaker's posture is upright as they stand behind a podium or at a
microphone, but this is not always the case. Less formal occasions and
audiences may call for movement of the whole body. If this informality
fits your speech, you will need to balance movement with the other
delivery variables. This kind of balance can be challenging. You won't
want to wander aimlessly around the stage or pace back and forth on the
same path. Nor will you want to shuffle your feet, rock, or shift your
weight back and forth. Instead, as with every other aspect of delivery,
you will want your movements to be purposeful, with the intention of
connecting with or influencing your audience. Time your movements to
occur at key points or transitions in the script.

## Cultural Considerations {#sect-00006}

Don't forget to reflect on cultural considerations that relate to your
topic and/or audience. Cultural awareness is important in any aspect of
writing, but it can have an immediate impact on a speech, as the
audience will react to your words, gestures, vocal techniques, and topic
in real time. Elements that speakers don't always think
about---including gestures, glances, and changes in tone and
inflection---can vary in effectiveness and even politeness in many
cultures. Consideration for cultural cues may include the following:

Paralanguage

: voiced cultural considerations, including tone, language, and even
accent.

Kinesics

: body movements and gestures that may include facial expressions. Often
part of a person's subconscious, kinesics can be interpreted in various
ways by members of different cultures. Body language can include
posture, facial expressions (smiling or frowning), and even displays of
affection.

Proxemics

: interpersonal space that regulates intimacy. Proxemics might indicate
how close to an audience a speaker is located, whether the speaker moves
around, and even how the speaker greets the audience.

Chronemics

: use of time. Chronemics refers to the duration of a script.

Appearance

: clothing and physical appearance. The presentation of appearance is a
subtle form of communication that can indicate the speaker's identity
and can be specific to cultures.

## Stage Directions {#sect-00007}

You can think proactively about ways to enhance the delivery of your
script, including vocal techniques, body awareness, and cultural
considerations. Within the draft of your script, create stage
directions. An integral part of performances such as plays and films,
stage directions can be as simple as writing in a pause for dramatic
effect or as complicated as describing where and how to walk, what
facial expressions to make, or how to react to audience feedback.

Look at this example from the beginning of the student sample. Stage
directions are enclosed in parentheses and bolded.

Several years ago, I sat in the waiting area of a major airport, trying
to ignore the constant yapping of a small dog cuddled on the lap of a
fellow passenger. An airline rep approached the woman and asked the only
two questions allowed by law. *(high-pitched voice with a formal tone)*
"Is that a service animal? *(pause)* What service does it provide for
you?"

*(bold, defiant, self-righteous tone)* "Yes. It keeps me from having
panic attacks," the woman said defiantly, and the airline employee
retreated. *(move two steps to the left for emphasis)*

Shortly after that, another passenger arrived at the gate. *(spoken with
authority)* She gripped the high, stiff handle on the harness of a
Labrador retriever that wore a vest emblazoned with the words "The
Seeing Eye." *(speed up speech and dynamic of voice for dramatic
effect)* Without warning, the smaller dog launched itself from its
owner's lap, snarling and snapping at the guide dog. *(move two steps
back to indicate transition)*

# Your Turn {#sect-00008}

Now it's your turn. Using the principle illustrated above, create stage
directions for your script. Then, practice using them by presenting your
script to a peer reviewer, such as a friend, family member, or
classmate. Also consider recording yourself practicing your script.
Listen to the recording to evaluate it for delivery, fluency, and vocal
fillers. Remember that writing is recursive: you can make changes based
on what works and what doesn't after you implement your stage
directions. You can even ask your audience for feedback to improve your
delivery.

# Podcast Publication {#sect-00009}

If possible, work with your instructor and classmates to put together a
single [podcast](#) or a series of [podcasts](#) according to the
subject areas of the presentations. The purpose of these podcasts should
be to invite and encourage other students to get involved in important
causes. Work with relevant student organizations on campus to produce
and publicize the podcasts for maximum impact. There are many free
resources for creating podcasts, including Apple's [GarageBand](#) and
[Audacity](#).
