m00068

ab48985a-2112-4452-b8a1-34ab62b9aac5

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

You have likely visited an unfamiliar city or neighborhood. When you
aren't in familiar surroundings, what do you do if you want to find
something to eat or do for fun? You probably open your phone and search
on *Yelp*, *TripAdvisor*, *Google*, or another app or website dedicated
to providing film reviews, or critical appraisals. Even when closer to
home, many people, whether looking for a unique local restaurant, a new
hiking trail, or an auto mechanic, may base their decisions on online
reviews.

You may even have written a review of a product or service and posted it
online yourself. In your review, you shared your evaluation---your
overall thoughts on the strengths and weaknesses---of the customer
service, atmosphere, prices, quality, and so on. You decided on a set of
criteria, or characteristics that determine a positive experience, and
made your evaluation of the business according to those criteria and
your experiences with similar products or services. Ultimately, you used
the evidence you gathered from your interaction with the product or
service to make an evaluation, or judgment. Maybe you used a rating
system to give five stars or used the phrase "would not recommend" to
make your negative judgment clear.

In performing these tasks, you engaged in the review genre, or form of
writing, used to evaluate businesses, products, and art
forms---including restaurants, health care, cell phones, cars, video
games, books, films, and more. Throughout this chapter, you will learn
about the characteristics of reviews and how to write them.
