m00069

2733b0fe-6c8a-4992-9f74-feab13347a29

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain the role of the review genre in personal, professional, and
academic contexts.

Articulate what differentiates the review genre from other genres.

Developing evaluation skills can help you in everyday life. Just about
anything you buy or use will require you to evaluate a range of choices
based on criteria that are important to you. For example, writing a good
paper or making a good presentation necessitates locating and evaluating
sources. See [Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and
Documenting Sources](#) for more information. You also may be asked to
evaluate the effectiveness of your courses at the end of the semester.
Or you may be asked to evaluate the work of your peers to help them
revise their compositions. In the professional world, you may be asked
to evaluate solutions to problems, employees you supervise, and in some
cases, even yourself. Evaluating effectively makes you not only a better
consumer but also a better student, employee, and possible supervisor.

# Using Evidence to Make a Judgment {#sect-00002}

When you review or evaluate something, the end result is your judgment
about it. *Should your readers see the film? Are the food and service
good at the restaurant? Should you use this source in your essay? Does
your employee deserve a raise?* Making a clear judgment about the
subject of your evaluation provides guidance for the actions that
audience members may take on the basis of the information you provide.

Ultimately, your judgment is your opinion. For example, it is expected
that some people will love *Avengers: Endgame* (2019) and others will
not. In fact, because some people may disagree with you, reviews provide
a perfect opportunity to use evidence to defend your judgment. You are
probably familiar with some ways in which reviewers present their
judgments about their subjects. Reviews on *Facebook*, *Google*, and
*Yelp* have a star rating system (the more stars the better). The film
review site *Rotten Tomatoes* shows the percentage of reviewers that
recommend the film. The review site *The AV Club* rates films and TV
episodes by using an A-to-F grading scale.

While it is important to present your overall judgment in a review, a
simple "I liked it" or "I didn't like it" is not enough to help your
audience make their own judgments. It is also important to explain *why*
you arrived at the judgment you did. Think about some of the titles of
reviews you have seen online. One might simply read "DIRTY!" about an
experience staying in a hotel. Other reviews might present a thesis, or
debatable main idea, as a title, such as *Slate* culture critic Willa
Paskin's "In Its Immensely Satisfying Season Finale, *Game of Thrones*
Became the Show It Had Always Tried Not to Be." In both examples, the
title provides an overall reason for the author's judgment.

Although a simple rating might be effective when reviewing a business,
reviews of creative works such as films, TV shows, visual arts, and
books are more complex. Critics ---professional writers who review
creative works---like Willa Paskin try to review their subjects and at
the same time analyze their subjects' cultural significance. In addition
to providing an overall judgment, critics guide audiences on how to view
and understand a work within a larger cultural context. Critics provide
this guidance by answering questions such as these:

In what genre would I place this work? Why?

What has this work contributed to its genre that other works have not?

How does the creator (or creators) of this work show they understand the
culture (audience) that will view the work?

How does this work reflect the time in which it was created?

People look to critics not only to judge the overall quality of a work
but also to gain insights about it.

Other writing genres feature characteristics similar to the review
genre, using criteria and evidence to analyze and sometimes evaluate the
effectiveness of written or visual text: [Rhetorical Analysis:
Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric](#), [Print or Textual Analysis: What
You Read](#), and [Image Analysis: Writing About What You See](#).
