m00070

183017fa-e441-4f1f-9ef9-3aa85248b109

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Read for inquiry, learning, and critical thinking.

Make judgments about the role of credibility and bias in the review
genre.

Identify characteristics of review writing, including evaluation
criteria and attention to historical context.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

"Think about \[reviewing\] as a form of reporting . . . with the
addition of your . . . carefully considered opinion."
::::

# Consistently Objective {#sect-00002}

Born in New Haven, Connecticut, Michiko Kakutani (b. 1955) is an
American author and a literary critic. She graduated from Yale
University in 1976 and began her career with *The Washington Post* as a
reporter. She moved to *Time* magazine in 1977, then in 1979 began
working for *The New York Times*, first as a reporter and then as a
literary critic. She is probably best known for the position she held as
chief book critic at *The New York Times* until her retirement in 2017.
Highly respected---and often feared---as a critic, Kakutani won a
Pulitzer Prize for criticism in 1998. Her book reviews for *The New York
Times* were highly influential, with some reviews creating as much
discussion and debate as the book being reviewed. American authors
[Jonathan Franzen](#) (b. 1959) and [Norman Mailer](#) (1923--2007), for
instance, feuded publicly with Kakutani after she published negative
reviews of their works.

Kakutani is also known as an author, having published two books since
her retirement: *The Death of Truth: Notes on Falsehood in the Age of
Trump* (2018) and *Ex Libris: 100+ Books to Read and Reread* (2020)---a
collection of essays about books that have been influential and
illuminating.

One reason for Kakutani's effectiveness as a reviewer might be the air
of mystery she maintained in the eyes of authors and publishers.
Unafraid to say exactly what she thought about a literary work---and
seemingly undaunted by the reactions of angry writers---she would praise
an author for one book and pan the author's next one. Shunning industry
events, she curried neither access nor favor with authors and publishers
and rarely gave interviews. Her refusal to get too close to authors and
publishers added to her credibility and objectivity, possibly allowing
her more freedom to review books honestly.

Instead of a simple thumbs-up or thumbs-down, Kakutani would make her
evaluations clear in more subtle and comprehensive ways. For example,
she referred to former director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI) [James Comey](#)'s (b. 1960) book *A Higher Loyalty: Truth, Lies,
and Leadership* (2018) as "absorbing" and the characters in Jamaican
author [Marlon James](#)'s (b. 1970) book *Black Leopard, Red Wolf*
(2019) as "compelling." Instead of a formula or template, Kakutani
sought to read books as a reader, rather than a critic, would read and
understand them. She tended to pick examples of what she liked and
disliked and what she found notable about the book, without preconceived
notions of what it "should" be. It might be fair to say that Kakutani's
evaluation criteria were never clear-cut; more often they were implied
rather than explicit. However, decades of experience imbued Kakutani
with historical knowledge and genre expertise that have provided the
backbone of her reviews.

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00003}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
