m00071

83a32842-3b3d-4ed0-bb04-651715d823c1

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify and define common characteristics, mediums, key terms, and
features of the review genre.

Identify criteria and evidence to support reviews of different primary
sources.

Reviews vary in style and content according to the subject, the writer,
and the medium. The following are characteristics most frequently found
in reviews:

Focused subject

:

The subject of the review is specific and focuses on one item or idea.
For example, a review of all Marvel Cinematic Universe movies could not
be contained in the scope of a single essay or published review not only
because of length but also because of the differences among them.
Choosing one specific item to review---a single film or single topic
across films, for instance---will allow you to provide a thorough
evaluation of the subject.

Judgment

or evaluation:

Reviewers need to deliver a clear judgment or evaluation to share with
readers their thoughts on the subject and why they would or would not
recommend it. An evaluation can be direct and explicit, or it can be
indirect and subtle.

Specific evidence

:

All reviews need specific evidence to support the evaluation. Typically,
this evidence comes in the form of quotations and vivid descriptions
from the primary source, or subject of the review. Reviewers often use

secondary sources

---works about the primary source

---

to support their claims or provide context.

Context

:

Reviewers provide context, such as relevant historical or cultural
background, current events, or short biographical sketches, that help
readers understand both the primary source and the review.

Tone

:

Writers of effective reviews tend to maintain a professional, unbiased
tone---attitude toward the subject. Although many reviewers try to avoid
sarcasm and dismissiveness, you will find these elements present in
professional reviews, especially those in which critics pan the primary
source.

# Key Terms {#sect-00002}

These are some key terms to know and use when writing a review:

Analysis

:

detailed examination of the parts of a whole or of the whole itself.

Connotation:

implied feelings or thoughts associated with a word. Connotations can be
positive or negative. Reviewers often use words with strong positive or
negative

connotations

that support their praise or criticism. For example, a writer may refer
to a small space positively as "cozy" instead of negatively as
"cramped."

Criteria

:

standards by which something is judged. Reviewers generally make their
evaluation criteria clear by listing and explaining what they are basing
their review on. Each type of primary source has its set of standards,
some or all of which reviewers address.

Critics

:

professional reviewer who typically publishes reviews in well-known
publications.

Denotation

:

the literal or dictionary definition of a word.

Evaluation

:

judgment based on analysis.

Fandom

:

community of admirers who follow their favorite works and discuss them
online as a group.

Genre

:

broad category of artistic compositions that share similar
characteristics such as form, subject matter, or style. For example,
horror, suspense, and drama are common film and literary genres. Hip hop
and reggae are common music genres.

Medium

:

way in which a work is created or delivered (DVD, streaming, book,
vinyl, etc.). Works can appear in more than one medium.

Mode

:

sensory method through which a person interacts with a work. Modes
include linguistic, visual, audio, spatial, and gestural.

Primary Sources

:

in the context of reviewing, the original work or item being reviewed,
whether a film, book, performance, business, or product. In the context
of research, primary sources are items of firsthand, or original,
evidence, such as interviews, court records, diaries, letters, surveys,
or photographs.

Recap

:

summary of an individual episode of a television series.

Review

:

genre that evaluates performances, exhibitions, works of art (books,
movies, visual arts), services, and products

Secondary source:

source that contains the analysis or synthesis of someone else, such as
opinion pieces, newspaper and magazine articles, and academic journal
articles.

Subgenre

:

category within a genre. For example, subgenres of drama include various
types of drama: courtroom drama, historical/costume drama, and family
drama.

# Establishing Criteria {#sect-00003}

All reviewers and readers alike rely on evidence to support an
evaluation. When you review a primary source, the evidence you use
depends on the subject of your evaluation, your audience, and how your
audience will use your evaluation. You will need to determine the
criteria on which to base your evaluation. In some cases, you will also
need to consider the genre and subgenre of your subject to determine
evaluation criteria. In your review, you will need to clarify your
evaluation criteria and the way in which specific evidence related to
those criteria have led you to your judgment. [\#](#) illustrates
evaluation criteria in four different primary source types.

  *Smartphone*        *Academic Source*                     *Film*            *Employment*
  ------------------- ------------------------------------- ----------------- ----------------------------
  Camera quality      Author's credentials                  Writing/script    Punctuality
  Battery life        Publication's reputation              Acting            Ability to meet goals
  Screen resolution   Sources cited                         Special effects   Ability to work on a team
  Screen size         Timeliness of research (up to date)   Sound/music       Communication skills
  Durability          Relevance to subject                  Directing         Professional development
  Phone reception     Quality of writing                    Subject           Competence in subject area

  : Evaluation criteria across subjects {#table-00001}

Even within the same subject, however, evaluation criteria may differ
according to the genre and subgenre of the film. Audiences have
different expectations for a horror movie than they do for a romantic
comedy, for example. For your subject, select the evaluation criteria on
the basis of your knowledge of audience expectations. [\#](#) shows how
the evaluation criteria might be different in film reviews of different
genres.

  *Horror*                                            *Action*                 *Romantic Comedy*                   *Drama*
  --------------------------------------------------- ------------------------ ----------------------------------- --------------------------------
  Makeup                                              Special effects          Jokes                               Script/writing
  Cinematography                                      Stunt work               Conflict/resolution                 Acting
  Type of horror depicted (jump scares, gore, etc.)   Pace of story            Chemistry between main characters   Accuracy/believability of plot
  Music                                               Relatability of "hero"   Satisfaction/happy ending           Scenery/setting/costumes

  : Evaluation criteria across film genres {#table-00002}

# Providing Objective Evidence {#sect-00004}

You will use your established evaluation criteria to gather specific
evidence to support your judgment. Remember, too, that criteria are
fluid; no reviewer will always use the same criteria for all works, even
those in the same genre or subgenre.

Whether or not the criteria are unique to the particular task, a
reviewer must look closely at the subject and note specific details from
the primary source or sources. If you are evaluating a product, look at
the product specifications and evaluate product performance according to
them, noting details as evidence. When evaluating a film, select either
quotations from the dialogue or detailed, vivid descriptions of scenes.
If you are evaluating an employee's performance, observe the employee
performing their job and take notes. These are examples of primary
source evidence: raw information you have gathered and will analyze to
make a judgment.

Gathering evidence is a process that requires you to look closely at
your subject. If you are reviewing a film, you certainly will have to
view the film several times, focusing on only one or two elements of the
evaluation criteria at a time. If you are evaluating an employee, you
might have to observe that employee on several occasions and in a
variety of situations to gather enough evidence to complete your
evaluation. If you are evaluating a written argument, you might have to
reread the text several times and annotate or highlight key evidence. It
is better to gather more evidence than you think you need and choose the
best examples rather than try to base your evaluation on insufficient or
irrelevant evidence.

# Modes of Reviews {#sect-00005}

Not all reviews have to be written; sometimes a video or an audio review
can be more engaging than a written review. *YouTube* has become a
popular destination for project reviews, creating minor celebrities out
of popular reviewers. However, a written review of a movie might work
well because the reviewer can provide just enough information to avoid
spoiling the movie, whereas some reviews require more visual interaction
to understand.

Take reviewer [Doug DeMuro](#)'s popular *YouTube* channel. DeMuro
reviews cars---everything from sports cars to sedans to vintage cars.
Car buyers need to interact with a car to want to buy it, and *YouTube*
provides the next best thing by giving viewers an up-close look.

Technology is another popular type of review on *YouTube.* YouTube
creators like [Marques Brownlee](#) discuss rumors about the next Apple
iPhone or Samsung Galaxy and provide unboxing videos to record their
reactions to the latest phones and laptops. Like DeMuro's viewers,
Brownlee's audience can get up close to the product. Seeing a phone in
Brownlee's hands helps audience members imagine it in their hands.

On the other hand, reviews don't always need to be about products you
can touch, as [Paul Lucas](#) demonstrates on his *YouTube* channel
"Wingin' It!" Lucas reviews travel experiences (mainly airlines and
sometimes trains), evaluating the service of airlines around the world
and in various ticket classes.

What do these reviews have in common? First, they are all in the video
medium. *YouTube*'s medium is video; a podcast's medium is audio. They
also share a mode. *YouTube*'s mode is viewing or watching; a podcast's
mode is listening.

These examples all use the genre conventions of reviews discussed in
this chapter. The reviewers present a clear evaluation: *should you buy
this car, phone, or airline ticket?* They base their evaluation on
evidence that fits a set of evaluation criteria. Doug DeMuro might
evaluate a family sedan on the basis of seating, trunk storage, and ride
comfort. Marques Brownlee might judge a phone on the basis of battery
life, design, and camera quality. Paul Lucas might grade an airline on
service, schedules, and seat comfort. While the product or service being
reviewed might be different, all three reviewers use similar frameworks.
