m00072

260c4c49-83ca-4a0f-babe-c5f7661508c0

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Recognize key terms and features of review writing.

Explain how conventions of the review genre are shaped by purpose,
language, culture, and expectation.

Analyze relationships between ideas and patterns of organization in
written texts.

# Introduction {#sect-00002}

In her essay "The Black Experience: What We See and Hear in Film,"
Caelia Marshall reviews *Rear Window* (1954), *Number 37* (2018), and
*Black Panther* (2018), looking at them through the context of
representation of Black people in film. She uses some traditional
film-review criteria but focuses primarily on the films' social and
historical contexts. Marshall presents her judgment and provides
specific evidence from primary and secondary sources.

# What We See and What We Hear {#sect-00003}

The global film industry, worth nearly \$50 billion dollars (Watson), is
a powerhouse of social influence, affecting people's perceptions,
ideologies, values, and language on both conscious and subconscious
levels. Phrases such as "Winter is coming" infiltrate the modern lexicon
in areas of public life ranging from advertising to politics.
Problematically, however, highly popular and influential shows like the
HBO series *Game of Thrones* lack diversity, unapologetically
perpetuating the dominant White cultural narrative. For the most part,
audiences catapult shows that portray such skewed narratives to
popularity, failing to notice or care about the lack of diversity.
Through both production and consumption, the lack of diversity that
exists in the entertainment industry works as an arm of oppression,
complicit in keeping Black characters and Black stories hidden from
view. This lack of representation of Black people and culture in film
and television is more dangerous than the stereotypical racist
representations of mammies, servants, and criminals in the past because
it allows audiences to dismiss Black experiences entirely, making these
audience members less empathetic to diverse points of view.

Purpose. *Marshall achieves two important objectives for the opening
paragraph of her essay: getting her audience's attention and presenting
her thesis. Marshall begins with an important statistic (the film
industry is worth nearly \$50 billion globally) and uses a specific
example of a popular expression from a television show with which the
audience is likely familiar ("Winter is coming" from the HBO series*
Game of Thrones*) to illustrate the power and widespread influence of
film and TV on American culture.*

Thesis. *Marshall then points out the lack of diversity in* Game of
Thrones *and in film and TV more generally that leads to her thesis:
This lack of diversity is harmful to society ("This lack of
representation of Black people and culture . . . diverse points of
view.").*

Like many movies of the early and mid-20th century, director Alfred
Hitchcock's film *Rear Window* (1954) lacks authentic Black characters.

Criteria. *Marshall elaborates on her evaluation criteria: the lack of
authentic Black characters.*

In *Rear Window,* the Black experience is evident only when the
presumably White female babysitter character talks for a few brief
seconds to the police chief, whose children she watches, from an
off-screen position using slurred, stereotypical southern Black dialect,
with incorrect grammar. Dr. James Ivy calls this interjection the "audio
version of blackface."

Blackface is an American theatrical minstrel practice that dates to the
mid to late 1800s, in which White traveling musicians painted their
faces black and for comic effect mimicked the singing and dancing of
slaves.

Definition of Terms. *Marshall clarifies the terms she uses; "audio
version of blackface" is taken from a secondary source, whereas "mammy"
reflects Marshall's own interpretation.*

In this scene, the babysitter responds to her White male employer in the
voice of the stereotypical mammy---a Black nursemaid who took care of
White children, particularly in the south. Hitchcock appears to offer
the scene as comic relief, expecting audiences to laugh during a tense
confrontation between protagonist L. B. Jefferies and the police chief.
The fact that Hitchcock calls upon this stereotypical minstrel tradition
to create a moment of comedy illustrates the inherent racism of a script
that uses the Black experience as a punch line rather than attempts to
reflect the Black experience as it is. Somehow, Hitchcock manages both
to exclude Black people from his film and to make use of Black
stereotypes. However, as insidious as Hitchcock's choice to call upon
this stereotype for comic effect may be, it is not as dangerous as his
exclusion of Black characters. This exclusion has the effect of erasing
the authentic Black experience altogether, making it meaningless within
the discourse of popular culture. Yet Hitchcock himself was rewarded for
his efforts, earning critical praise and Academy Award nominations for
his masterful ability to create suspense in this film, regardless of his
shoddy characterization of racial issues in 1950s America.

Evidence. *In this paragraph, Marshall highlights another specific
example of the lack of diversity in film. With this example, she goes
into more detail to illustrate the harmful stereotyping and exclusion of
Black characters.*

While some may argue that as a White filmmaker Hitchcock does not have a
responsibility to reflect the Black experience accurately in his films,
their argument falls apart with Hitchcock's use of "audio blackface."
Hitchcock accepts the responsibility of including the Black perspective,
but he fails in his presentation, and the film suffers for it when
Hitchcock goes for a laugh at the expense of the Black community.
Instead of elevating Black culture and experiences through his use of
Black characters, he portrays their point of view as invalid and
perpetuates their oppression. Hitchcock doesn't just ignore the
existence of Black people, he uses them to promote a racist agenda.

Addressing a Counterclaim. *Marshall admits some people might argue that
Hitchcock is not writing a social drama and thus accept his exclusion of
Black characters. But she then counters this opinion.*

This moral failure becomes clear when *Rear Window* is contrasted with
its counterpart *Number 37*, a remake of the original as envisioned by
South African writer and director Nosipho Dumisa. In *Number 37*, the
disabled spectator, Randal, is confined to his apartment in a
notoriously dangerous area of post-apartheid South Africa when he
notices a criminal murder a cop. He descends into a voyeuristic frenzy
as he uses the crime to figure out how to resolve his debt to a former
gang mate. By adding layers of violence, an African setting, and the
inclusion of a paralyzed Black protagonist, Dumisa creates a film that
transcends the plot to comment on the social narrative of poor Black
people following the end of apartheid in South Africa.

Thesis. *This paragraph introduces the film* Number 37 *to illustrate
the thesis that underrepresentation of Black people in film is harmful
to society.*

Evidence. *Marshall briefly summarizes plot events so that readers
unfamiliar with the film know something about the plot and how it
differs from Hitchcock's* Rear Window*. She also provides information
about the main character and setting but indicates that these are not
her focus, as she mentions that the film "transcends" plot. The
implication is that it transcends certain other film criteria as well.*

While both Hitchcock's Jefferies and Dumisa's Randal make light of a
murder, Randal's response is mired in his social situation as a Black
man in South Africa, whereas Jefferies's response is mired in his social
situation as a privileged White man in America. Dumisa's film reflects a
cultural depth that Hitchcock compromises for a joke. She understands
that "you can entertain while still teaching the audience something"
(Obenson).

Structure. *Marshall uses this paragraph to contrast the original* Rear
Window *with a remake of the film. Comparing and contrasting similar
works is an effective technique for illustrating a point when the
purpose is to evaluate a work.*

Criteria. *As criteria for comparison, she chooses characters, plot
elements, and most important here, social context. In her comparison,
she uses a relevant secondary source, as she does in the paragraph that
follows and introduces* Black Panther.

Malian writer, filmmaker, and cultural theorist Manthia Diawara
describes the "manner in which black spectators may . . . resist the
persuasive elements of Hollywood narrative" as a "challenge to . . .
spectatorship and the aesthetics of Afro-American independent cinema"
(845). The 2018 movie *Black Panther* may be understood as an answer to
Diawara's challenge. Skillfully directed by African American
screenwriter Ryan Coogler, *Black Panther* is an example of the
aesthetic beauty and financial success that art can achieve when not
only are Black characters cast but also when Black storylines are
expressed by the people who have had firsthand experiences.

Criteria. *Using a genre criterion of directing, Marshall notes director
Coogler's "skill."*

Criteria. *Marshall praises the performance of American actor Chadwick
Boseman (1976--2020).*

Social Context. *She also quotes from a secondary source as an
opportunity to respond to and engage with the scholar quoted.*

*Black Panther* chronicles the origin of the Marvel superhero Black
Panther---played compellingly by Chadwick Boseman---who is descended
from a line of black panthers living in the fictional African region of
Wakanda. Wakanda is technologically advanced because of its rich store
of a fictional metal called Vibranium. While the Wakandans have
benefited from Vibranium, they have kept it from the outside world by
cloaking their society in the stereotypical poverty expected of Africans
by Western nations. In *Black Panther*, this reversal of the roles of
the advanced and the underprivileged serves as a critique of the
historical actions of Western nations.

Social Context. *In the paragraph above and the one that follows, the
author focuses on social context. She wants readers to see the
possibilities in* Black Panther *when Black people's authentic stories
are shown to a wider audience.*

Although mythological and thus fictional, the movie features many
references to African American history and the African American
experience: slavery and the slave trade, colonization, the exploitation
of Africa, civil rights, Black militancy, systemic poverty, and the loss
of Black men---especially fathers---to violence and incarceration. These
topics are usually whitewashed or ignored in popular cinema because of
their graphic and racially charged nature.

Comparison to Other Films. *Marshall broadens the scope of her statement
by bringing in the problem as it relates to other films.*

However, because diverse audiences viewed and welcomed this film, the
movie registered as valuable not only for the people it reflected but
for non-Black people as well. This effect supports Dumisa's argument
that Black art has the power both to entertain and to instruct when
representation is not only present but authentic.

The film reinvents the representation of Black people in American cinema
through its characterization of Black superheroes. Although the villain
of *Black Panther,* Erik Killmonger, is Black, the character is not the
stereotypical Black criminal of movies past. Despite his last name and
the negative connotation of *monger*, this intense and angry antihero,
played by Michael B. Jordan, captures the sympathy of viewers.

Connotation. *Marshall explains Killmonger's name. Monger, meaning
"vendor," has a negative connotation, implying dealing aggressively in
an undesirable product.*

While young, Killmonger loses his Black militant father who was living
in the United States as a Wakandan emissary. Killmonger's anger and his
fight against Wakanda represent an effort to take back what he views as
his father's loss---the ability to arm poor Black people throughout the
world in a fight for civil rights. Although his anger may be misguided,
viewers are able to understand its source and empathize. If the
Killmonger villain were purely evil or unintelligent, he would have
embodied the criminal stereotype who has appeared in a lot of movies. In
this film, however, he becomes someone who cannot find a positive outlet
for his Black rage, something that is relatable to many Black people
today.

Evidence Based on Criteria. *Using specific details from the film,
Marshall illustrates how* Black Panther *"reinvents the representation
of Black people in American cinema." She describes Killmonger in detail
and connects those traits to her point that the character represents a
villain whose motivations are relatable to the audience.*

When the Black Panther, T'Challa, reclaims Wakanda from Killmonger at
the end of the movie, he shows his cousin Killmonger grace by inviting
him back into the Wakandan community, an ideal that is characteristic of
the Black communal experience. T'Challa offers Killmonger a place in
their society, which Killmonger rejects, lamenting, "Just bury me in the
ocean with my ancestors who jumped ships, 'cause they knew death was
better than bondage." Killmonger's frustration mirrors the modern-day
frustration with the exploitation and degradation of Black people in all
aspects of life. The incarceration of Black citizens, primarily men, is
the simple answer to the complex problem that crime is often the
manifestation of poverty, social oppression, and systemic racism, and
even Wakanda is not immune from this problem. In this sense, Wakanda is
not a utopia, but a working model of purposeful Black agency within the
international community.

Evidence. *Marshall continues her analysis with more specific examples,
this time quoting from her primary sources to illustrate her point.*

A systematic form of racism is perpetuated by producers and filmmakers
intentionally distorting or excluding the Black experience from art.
These racist intentions have the effect of teaching, or brainwashing,
audiences to dismiss Black perspectives, thus contributing further to
the racist structure of the film industry. When films leave out Black
characters, they create a narrative reality in which Black people are
not essential. This situation translates into a physical reality where
Black experiences and stories are not seen as profitable or valid by the
public.

**Connotation and denotation*.* *Marshall uses words with strong
connotations:* short-sighted *and* narrow, *when used in certain
contexts (relating to a vision problem and to width). These words take
on negative connotations when placed in a cultural context. So do words
like* brainwashing*, which has negative connotations as opposed to a
more positive or neutral word like* teaching *or* instilling*.*
Diverse*, however, has positive connotations in this same context,
despite its neutral denotation of "varied."*

However, when the short-sighted and narrowly representative *Rear
Window* is contrasted with the diverse and highly successful *Black
Panther*, the act of dismissing Black characters appears outdated and
not economically necessary. Yet the practice of exclusion continues in
many high-budget films because Hollywood is still controlled largely by
the White male point of view. These male executives have a stake in
producing films that support and facilitate the status quo of the
perpetuation of a narrative that they can relate to. They have no reason
to emphasize story lines that compete with or threaten their authority
unless audiences become critically aware of the power of media to
legitimize and delegitimize social groups. Audiences must "resist the
persuasive elements of Hollywood narrative" (Diawara 845) with their
pocketbooks.

Conclusion. *Marshall ends with a rewording of her thesis, as well as a
summary of her evidence. She issues a call to action through a quotation
from one of her secondary sources.*

## Works Cited {#sect-00004}

Diawara, M. "Black Spectatorship: Problems of Identification and
Resistance." *Screen*, vol. 29, no. 4, Jan. 1988, pp. 66--79,
doi:10.1093/screen/29.4.66.

Obenson, Tambay. "Alfred Hitchcock's 'Rear Window' Has Been Remade as a
South African Political Thriller." *IndieWire*, 19 Nov. 2018,
www.indiewire.com/2018/11/number-37-south-africa-hitchcock-rear-window-120202152/#!.

Watson, Amy. "Film Industry---Statistics and Facts." *Statista*, 10 Nov.
2020, www.statista.com/topics/964/film/.

Citation: *Marshall uses MLA style to document her sources.*

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00005}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
