m00073

07038c5c-cc98-44ce-85fd-f9b79def7fc5

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Compose a review based on a thesis supported by analysis and evaluation.

Demonstrate the steps of the writing process: invention, drafting,
revising, and editing.

Participate in the collaborative and social aspects of writing
processes.

Give and act on productive feedback to works in progress.

Adapt composing processes for a variety of technologies and modalities.

Throughout this chapter, you have learned about the review genre. You
have learned that reviews evaluate a variety of items. In addition to
books, films, and TV shows, people look to reviews to buy cars, choose
restaurants, hire plumbers, and more. In this section, you will have the
opportunity to demonstrate your understanding of the review genre by
composing your own review.

# Summary of Assignment: Review of Primary Media Source {#sect-00002}

Write a review of a specific film, book, TV series, podcast, play, or
video game that you think contributes something significant to the genre
and to the culture at large. Show how the subject---the primary
source---of your review illustrates something compelling or exceptional
about a particular idea or theme common to the genre. For example, the
CW series *Crazy Ex-Girlfriend* (2015--2019) is a romantic comedy that
eschews and even satirizes traditional romantic comedy tropes such as
the "grand gesture," doing something out of love for someone. Use
specific evidence from your primary source to support a central idea, or
thesis. In an essay of about 1,200 to 1,500 words, provide an overall
judgment about your subject and support it with evidence from the
primary source and from secondary sources if applicable. In addition,
explore how your specific source has contributed something significant
to its genre. In other words, *why is this subject interesting,
different, or worthy of analysis?* Be sure to demonstrate awareness of
your source's cultural and historical context as well. For example, if
your review is about a romantic comedy, provide relevant information
about the history, conventions, or expectations of that genre. Think
about and explain the ways your topic adheres to or breaks from audience
expectations.

Another Lens 1. Create a three-to-five-minute podcast review of a
specific [film](#), [book](#), TV series, [album](#), podcast, play, or
video game. *How does the subject of your review illustrate something
interesting or unique about a particular idea or theme common to the
genre?* Integrate specific evidence from the primary source and
secondary sources, if applicable, to support a main idea, or thesis.

To record your podcast review, use either a simple recording method,
such as the voice memo app on your smartphone, or something more
sophisticated, such as *Garage Band* or *iMovie.* To become more
familiar with this genre of reviewing, listen to one or two of the
examples linked above. Note how this genre is somewhat different from an
academic essay. For example, the speaker's voice is more conversational
and engages the audience auditorily by stressing particular words or
syllables. In your review podcast, take advantage of the opportunity to
present a more informal tone than you might use in an academic essay.
Podcast hosts are often successful because of their personality and
ability to connect with their audience. Draft a script for your review
podcast that reflects your personality and use of language, rather than
formal language. For example, use contractions, first- or second-person
pronouns, and appropriate slang.

Finally, to maximize the effect of your podcast, consider incorporating
short clips from the subject of your review. Upload your podcast review
to [SoundCloud](#) and share your review with the class. For more
direction on public speaking, consult [Scripting for the Public Forum:
Writing to Speak](#).

Another Lens 2. Instead of a straightforward review of a single primary
source, review several sources in the same genre, as Caelia Marshall has
done in her essay. Or compare a film to the book on which it is based
and evaluate it. Select your sources from films, books, television
programs, video games, or any other form of entertainment, focusing your
review essay on a single area, such as social context, character
development, or screenplay vs. original text. Choose other
genre-specific evaluation criteria as well, and address them in your
essay, as Marshall does. Use specific evidence from your primary sources
and secondary sources, as needed, to support your main idea, or thesis.
In other words, *why is this source interesting, different, or worthy of
analysis?*

# Developing Evaluative Criteria {#sect-00005}

To write an effective review, you need clear and relevant evaluation
criteria. To help you establish your review criteria, fill in a table
similar to [\#](#) by following these steps:

Write the name of your primary source.

In the left-hand column, write the genre category to which your topic
belongs (horror, action, biography, etc.).

Under the genre, brainstorm as many characteristics of the genre as you
can.

In the right-hand column, write "Examples."

Brainstorm as much evidence from your primary source as you can think
of.

Create a second table called "Subgenre." For example, if your topic is a
horror film, some possible subgenres might be "ghost horror," "monster
horror," or "slasher horror." Add a colon after

Subgenre

, and write the subgenre type.

Label the left-hand column "Subgenre Elements" and the right-hand column
"How to Evaluate."

In the Subgenre Elements column, brainstorm for as many characteristics
of the subgenre as you can. You can use some relevant characteristics
from step 3, but try to focus on unique characteristics of the subgenre.
For example, what makes a horror film about a ghost, such as

The

Grudge

(2020), different from a slasher horror film, such as

The

Texas Chainsaw Massacre

(2003)?

In the right-hand column, develop questions to assess characteristics.

Select three to five genre characteristics with the most evidence, and
focus on them as you look closely at your primary sources. Take notes
and gather evidence to support your evaluation.

+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| *Primary Source: *The Texas Chainsaw Massacre* (2003 Film)*         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| *Genre Characteristics: Horror*  | *Examples*                       |
+==================================+==================================+
| Script/plot: Scary story         | Presented as a "true" story,     |
|                                  | scary ending                     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Characters: "Monster" or "thing" | Leatherface, a masked killer who |
| that kills                       | wields a chainsaw                |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Characters: Victims, usually     | Young people stranded on a road  |
| multiple                         | trip                             |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Setting: Rural Texas             | Creepy locations with potential  |
|                                  | for violence                     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Special effects: (gore, jump     | Gore: blood and guts             |
| scares, etc.)                    |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Sound effects: Screaming         | Many victims and screaming from  |
|                                  | road trippers                    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Cinematography: "Gross" or       | Meat plant, creepy house         |
| "creepy" images                  |                                  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| *Subgenre: Slasher Horror*                                          |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| *Subgenre Elements*              | *How to Evaluate*                |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| One deranged killer              | Is the killer believable in the  |
|                                  | moment? Does the killer scare    |
|                                  | me?                              |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| One weapon characteristic to the | Is the weapon creative? Does it  |
| killer                           | fit the killer's character?      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Killer with a backstory          | Does the backstory tell me why   |
|                                  | the killer is deranged? Does it  |
|                                  | convince me it's the reason they |
|                                  | kill?                            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Killer hunts the victims         | Victims' terror should be        |
|                                  | convincing: realistic screaming, |
|                                  | fear, etc.                       |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Creepy images: setting, props,   | Are they realistic? How? How do  |
| etc. need to be realistic        | the images add to the sense of   |
|                                  | fear?                            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

: Genre and subgenre evaluation criteria {#table-00001}

*Evaluation Criteria for *The Texas Chainsaw Massacre*:*

*The Killer (Leatherface):* How effective is he at scaring the audience?
How does he scare the audience (backstory, appearance, weapon, etc.)?

*Images/Setting:* How do the filmmakers create a creepy setting? How
does the setting add to the fear?

*The Victims:* How do they project fear (screaming, etc.)? How effective
or convincing is their fear?

# Thesis Statement, Analysis, and Supporting Examples {#sect-00006}

After you have selected a topic and decided on the evaluation criteria,
spend some time looking closely at your primary source (the film, TV
show, book, etc. you have chosen to review). With these criteria in
mind, view/read/listen to your primary source. Take notes on how your
selected evaluation criteria apply to your source. When you come across
strong and relevant examples, write down vivid, detailed descriptions of
the scene and quote applicable dialogue. By looking closely at your
primary source and taking notes now, you will have solid and specific
examples to illustrate your points later when you draft your review.

Also, while you are looking closely at your primary source, think about
the features that appeal to you. *Is there a character that is
particularly interesting? Do you see an interesting viewpoint on a theme
or idea? Is the writing or the use of language interesting, different,
or clever? How does it keep your attention or provide something
unexpected?* The answers to these questions can lead you to your overall
evaluation and thesis.

## Thesis {#sect-00007}

Use a graphic organizer like [\#](#) to plan your draft. Then, you will
use the notes you took earlier to help you brainstorm for the main
points that support the thesis and provide specific, concrete evidence.

+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Primary Source*    | *Title of work(s) being reviewed*              |
+=====================+================================================+
| *Angle of Analysis* | Overall way you will organize your review:     |
|                     | aspects of the source you will analyze or      |
|                     | criteria on which you plan to focus.           |
|                     |                                                |
|                     | Example: female romantic-comedy leads.         |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Filters*           | Ways to narrow your focus, such as time,       |
|                     | place, cultural context, comparison to similar |
|                     | sources.                                       |
|                     |                                                |
|                     | Examples: the female lead in *Crazy            |
|                     | Ex-Girlfriend* versus other female romantic    |
|                     | comedy leads or how the 1961 film version of   |
|                     | *A Raisin in the Sun* depicts Lena Younger as  |
|                     | a "tyrant."                                    |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Main Argument*     | The idea you'll use to draft a working thesis; |
|                     | must be a debatable point about your topic.    |
|                     |                                                |
|                     | Example: Rebecca Bunch, the female lead in     |
|                     | *Crazy Ex-Girlfriend*, is flawed and not       |
|                     | virtuous. Her shortcomings make her character  |
|                     | more engaging than traditional romantic-comedy |
|                     | female leads.                                  |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| *Thesis*            | One sentence (sometimes two) that clearly      |
|                     | states your argument.                          |
|                     |                                                |
|                     | Example: Although most romantic-comedy female  |
|                     | leads are virtuous and have admirable          |
|                     | character traits, *Crazy Ex-Girlfriend's*      |
|                     | Rebecca Bunch is flawed and sometimes          |
|                     | unsympathetic; however, the audience still     |
|                     | roots for her to find love.                    |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+

: Preliminary drafting plan sample {#table-00002}

## Planning the Main Points and Body Paragraphs {#sect-00008}

Your main points should be your topic sentences, expressed as one
sentence at the beginning of each paragraph. Preview these main points
by adding *because* to your thesis statement as illustrated below.

*Examples*

Because romantic comedies such as

Knocked Up

\(2007\) depict their leads as unquestionably "good" people . . .

Because Rebecca Bunch is sometimes selfish . . .

Because Rebecca Bunch is sometimes promiscuous . . .

Because despite these flaws, men still seek her attention . . .

Because the audience sees Rebecca as realistic, they root for her . . .

Now complete a graphic organizer like [\#](#) by adding your main points
from your primary source.

+------------------------+--------------+
| Point 1. Because . . . | Explanation: |
|                        |              |
|                        | Example:     |
+------------------------+--------------+
| Point 2. Because . . . | Explanation: |
|                        |              |
|                        | Example:     |
+------------------------+--------------+
| Point 3. Because . . . | Explanation: |
|                        |              |
|                        | Example:     |
+------------------------+--------------+
| Point 4. Because . . . | Explanation: |
|                        |              |
|                        | Example:     |
+------------------------+--------------+

: Main points organizer {#table-00003}

As you continue to plan your review, consider these questions:
*Depending upon your audience, how much background or context should you
provide about your topic? Are they likely or unlikely to have knowledge
about the topic? Do you need to summarize anything about your primary
source? Do you need to provide historical or cultural context?* Use the
notes you took earlier as your draft your essay. Remember, you can
change things! It is up to you to decide how to organize your argument
and where to present specific evidence.

Your review will contain both summary/observation (objectivity) and
evaluation/analysis (subjectivity). Practice determining whether
statements are summary or observation as opposed to evaluation or
analysis.

## Secondary Source Evidence {#sect-00009}

Once you form your own opinions, you may want to look for additional
sources to support your review. Secondary sources, or sources that
contain the opinions and analyses of others, are frequently used in
academic writing to help writers support a point or provide background
and context. Scholarly, peer-reviewed secondary sources give your review
greater credibility because the articles are written by experts in their
fields. Use your college library's databases, or ask a librarian whether
your college provides access to journals that publish articles on
movies, television, and culture. Most colleges have access to JSTOR, a
database search engine focused on the humanities. In addition, the MLA
International Bibliography is a common database of journals related to
culture. [Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information](#) and
[Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting
Sources](#) provide more information about finding sources.

Another, less academic, place to look for secondary sources is in Recap.
In recent years, recapping has become a popular way to join the
conversation about TV shows, with sites such as *The AV Club*, *The
Huffington Post*, [*Slate*](#), [*The Verge*](#), and [*Vox*](#)
dedicating staff to summarizing and discussing popular shows. Fans
engage with each other and recap writers by commenting on and sharing
the articles.

Note, too, that well-known publications, such as [*The New York
Times*](#), review not only movies and TV shows but also products such
as those you may have chosen to write your review about. In addition,
[*Consumer Reports*](#) is one of the longest-running magazines
dedicated to reviewing products of all kinds. Many websites, as well,
review video games and consoles.

## Drafting the Introduction {#sect-00010}

The introduction should interest readers in your topic and make them
eager to learn more about it. If you were proposing this idea to a
company, *what would your "elevator pitch" be? What might you say to
quickly pique audience interest?* You might describe the part that
convinced you it was good. You might explain why your audience would
find the topic relatable.

Be sure readers know by the end of the introduction what specifically
you are reviewing. Provide the title and necessary background/context:
when it was made, the medium (film, book, podcast), the genre, and how
to find it (Netflix, Amazon Prime, Hulu). Include your overall
evaluation: *Did you like it or not, and why overall?*

Then present your thesis at the end of your introduction.

Introduction example. Many people love romantic comedies, but what
happens when real life isn't like the movies? We are conditioned to
believe there is one person we are destined to be with. Disney movies,
TV shows like *The Office*, Hallmark Channel Christmas movies, and
traditional romantic comedies reinforce the notion that for the
believer, true love is right around the corner. But everyone knows the
pain of rejection or of pining for a person who doesn't seem to notice
them. The CW series *Crazy Ex-Girlfriend* shows what it's like when love
is more complicated than what we see in the movies. The show follows
Rebecca Bunch, a successful but unhappy---and far from virtuous or
admirable---New York lawyer who instantly abandons her life to move to
West Covina, California, to pursue Josh Chan, her summer-camp crush from
long ago. Rebecca cooks up crazy, desperate schemes to get the attention
of the aloof and clueless Josh. *Crazy Ex-Girlfriend* masterfully taps
into our inner crazy ex by making good comedy out of Instagram stalking,
relationship sabotage, and infatuation.

Now, write your introduction:

General statement: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Background or context: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Brief summary: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Evaluation: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Thesis: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

## Drafting the Body {#sect-00012}

For the body of the review, provide more background and context wherever
you think such information is necessary. Because the purpose of this
part of the review is to present the main points that support the
thesis, be sure to show how these points explain the criteria on which
you have based your evaluation. Back up the main points with specific,
concrete evidence from your primary source. At this point, return to
your early notes and use the descriptions and quotations you gathered.
You will likely have collected more evidence as well. Use a graphic
organizer like [\#](#) to create your draft. Main points 1 and 2 should
be your topic sentences.

+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Main point 1 | Explanation:                                          |
|              |                                                       |
|              | Evidence:                                             |
|              |                                                       |
|              | " Examples: Quotations: Secondary source evidence (if |
|              | needed): "                                            |
+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Main point 2 | Explanation:                                          |
|              |                                                       |
|              | Evidence:                                             |
|              |                                                       |
|              | " Examples: Quotations: Secondary source evidence (if |
|              | needed): "                                            |
+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Main point 3 | Explanation:                                          |
|              |                                                       |
|              | Evidence:                                             |
|              |                                                       |
|              | " Examples: Quotations: Secondary source evidence (if |
|              | needed): "                                            |
+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Main point 4 | Explanation:                                          |
|              |                                                       |
|              | Evidence:                                             |
|              |                                                       |
|              | " Examples: Quotations: Secondary source evidence (if |
|              | needed): "                                            |
+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Main point 5 | Explanation:                                          |
|              |                                                       |
|              | Evidence:                                             |
|              |                                                       |
|              | " Examples: Quotations: Secondary source evidence (if |
|              | needed): "                                            |
+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+

: Drafting the body {#table-00004}

## Drafting the Conclusion {#sect-00013}

For the conclusion, summarize briefly how the criteria you used led you
to your evaluation, rephrase or validate your thesis, and make a
recommendation.

Conclusion example. *Crazy Ex-Girlfriend is a refreshing take on the
romantic comedy genre. It elevates comedy by using catchy, original
songs to accompany clever dialogue. Though Rebecca is intense and
extreme, her situation is relatable, and she comes across as more
sympathetic than not, proving that people don't have to be perfect to be
deserving of love. The departures from the romantic comedy playbook
leave the audience guessing what will happen next, ensuring the show
never feels tired or stale. What comes after the grand gesture and big
kiss? That's a question this show tries to answer, and sooner than you
might expect. If you're looking for a new binge-worthy show, clear your
calendar for the next week and give Crazy Ex-Girlfriend a try.*

Now, write your conclusion.

Brief summary of criteria and evaluation: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Restate or validate thesis: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Make a recommendation: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

# Conferencing with a Partner {#sect-00015}

After you finish your draft, receiving feedback from a peer will help
you identify the strengths and weaknesses in your review. Because
writers sometimes find it hard to review their work from the perspective
of their audience, peer feedback will help you see your writing in ways
not obvious to you. As a peer reviewer yourself, try to offer
suggestions to make the essay more like something you would want to
read.

To give and receive the most effective feedback, use the following
guidelines:

On your own draft, note the areas you are unsure about and where you
especially want feedback. It's a good idea to have specific questions so
that your peer can focus on what you think will help you.

When you are assigned a peer, read their essay at least once without
commenting, just to get a sense of what the essay is about.

Read the essay a second time. In the margins, add any comments or
reactions to the essay.

Focus on the introduction and comment on its effectiveness.

In what ways are the first few sentences engaging?

Would you want to keep reading to learn more? Why or why not?

In what ways does the introduction clearly establish what is being
reviewed? Does it provide sufficient background information? In what
ways does the thesis make a judgment or an evaluation with a reason that
leads to the judgment or evaluation?

Mark what you think the thesis is. If you find no clear thesis, mark
something for the writer to focus on to arrive at a thesis.

Jot down one or two prodding, open-ended questions to help the writer
develop or revise the thesis.

Next, focus on the body paragraphs.

Is enough background provided, either in the introduction or early in
the body, to give you a complete sense of what the writer is evaluating?

If there is not enough background, jot down a few questions that could
be answered with additional background and context.

What is the main point of each body paragraph?

In what ways do the main points support the thesis (my thesis is true
because . . .)?

Do the body paragraphs contain specific, concrete details from the
primary source to support the main points?

If the body needs more specific details, mark places where the writer
can add more detail.

Next, focus on the conclusion.

Does the conclusion clearly tie up the main points?

If not, how might the writer revise the conclusion?

Although your task is not to edit the essay or mark every error, point
out any consistent patterns of grammatical errors.

When you have finished, summarize your comments at the end of the review
by writing three things on which your peer can focus when revising.

As you work, be detailed and specific in your comments so that your peer
can use them to make revisions:

What specifically is working or not working?

Why is it working or not working?

What can the writer do specifically to revise?

If you are having trouble finding something to comment on, remember that
you can make comments about what the writer does well. Be sure to
explain in detail why you think it's working. Be sure to consult
[Evaluation: Effect on Audience](#) as well.

# Maintaining Ownership {#sect-00016}

When you receive your reviewed essay, look over the comments. Remember
that they are merely suggestions; your revisions are ultimately up to
you. For example, a sentence fragment, while technically incorrect,
could be an effective way to emphasize a point. It is your call to
decide whether your use of language is appropriate for your audience and
purpose. With that said, however, it's possible your peer pointed out
something you did not notice.

As you revise, keep in mind the following success criteria. Ensure your
essay has them:

Specific topic

:

The essay is about a specific TV show, film, book, podcast, video game,
or other primary source(s).

Interesting lead

:

You show your audience why this topic interests you and try to capture
their attention.

Thesis

:

You present a clear, debatable, and specific thesis about your topic.

Body

:

The body supports the thesis with clear main points. Summary is used
effectively to provide background and context.

Specific details

:

You support your main points with relevant and ample details (in the
form of quotations, paraphrases, vivid descriptions, etc.) from the
primary source or sources as well as secondary sources, if you have used
them.

Citation

:

Sources are cited correctly in the text.
