m00074

e08839d0-2b94-49c4-90df-cedebd802b22

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain the role direct quotations play in writing.

Select and integrate direct quotations into your writing.

Direct quotation, or someone's exact words, provide specific, concrete
evidence from your primary and secondary sources. When reviewing a film
or book, for example, you are likely to incorporate a number of direct
quotations into your writing. Quotations are effective when they are
used appropriately and correctly. For example, a general statement of
observation such as "The candidate for senate gave a disastrous
interview on TV last night" should be backed up with concrete evidence
from the interview. To demonstrate how and why the interview was
"disastrous," you might give examples such as these: "When asked whether
she supported ethics reform, Ms. Simpson did not give a direct answer.
She stated, 'I think ethics are important, and I hold myself to a high
ethical standard.'"

While quotations are covered more extensively in [Punctuation](#), this
section will introduce you to using quotations in a review.

# When to Use Quotations {#sect-00002}

Use quotations to support a point you are making. Avoid using them to
*present* a point. Don't pepper your essay with randomly selected
quotations because you think they make your essay look well researched.
Instead, present your point, and back it up with a quotation.

Using a direct quotation is effective in the following instances:

Because of its source, the quotation adds credibility to your point.

Wearing a mask is the easiest thing we can do as individuals to stop the
spread of COVID-19. According to Dr. Anthony Fauci, "There should be
universal wearing of masks." (Castillejo and Yang)

Because Fauci is the director of the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases (NIAID), his statement on mask wearing is credible
evidence that supports the point.

Because the author makes a statement in a particular way, its meaning
would be less effective if paraphrased.

In his review of the Microclimate Air Helmet, critic Drew Magary injects
humor by quipping, "No one at the vape shop cared that I was dressed
like I was in an old Moby video."

Using a direct quotation from Magary's review illustrates his style of
humor more effectively than a description or paraphrase of the joke.

Because the quotation contains important information, it is more
effective than a paraphrase.

Hurricane Harvey brought a record amount of flooding when it hit the
Houston, Texas, area in 2017. Harvey's rainfall "dumped an estimated 27
trillion gallons of rain over Texas and Louisiana during a 6-day
period." (Griggs)

The direct quotation contains the exact statistics that show the record
amount of flooding.

Because the quotation adds variety to the language and voice of the
essay, it makes the most impact on the audience in its original form.
For example, quote directly from a person you are writing about so that
the audience imagines them speaking.

A teacher may have suggested you use details to "show instead of tell."
Quotations are one way to *show* your audience what you mean rather than
*tell* them.

Practice finding quotations to illustrate the following point. You can
search the web or your college library's article databases.

Personal computing has evolved from a single desktop computer for the
whole family to a truly "personal" relationship each individual has with
their devices.

Hint: Look for information about how the size of personal computers has
changed, how the industry has introduced new devices, how many
Internet-connected devices an average person owns, and how many
different people use an Internet-connected device on average.

# Embedding Quotations {#sect-00003}

In reviews particularly, you may want to use dialogue or narration as
evidence to support a point. Because a quotation should illustrate or
support your point, be sure to state clearly and in your own words the
point you are making. A properly formatted quotation will contain the
following:

Quote in exact words:

Use ellipses (. . .) to omit irrelevant sections of a quotation or to
shorten it. Use brackets (\[\]) to add information to a quotation to
help it make sense.

Original Quotation: "Cybersecurity is an important issue for businesses
of all sizes. Every business from Fortune 500 companies to mom-and-pop
stores has an obligation to protect customers' sensitive data. Data
breaches, such as the Target breach in 2014, have been known to erode
trust." (Flynn)

Quotation using ellipses and brackets: "Cybersecurity is an important
issue for businesses . . . Data breaches, such as the Target breach in
2014, have been known to erode \[consumers'\] trust \[in the company\]."
(Flynn)

Correct punctuation:

Use quotation marks ("") to show exactly where the quotation begins and
ends. This punctuation helps separate the quotation from your words and
ideas and helps you avoid plagiarism.

Signal phrase:

Simple attribution phrases like "Smith says" or "As Jones argues" are
important to use with quotations so that the quotation is integrated
into your own sentence. When quoting directly, set off the quoted
material from the

signal phrase

, or speaker tag, with a comma, as in Example 1 below. When the
quotation is broken up by a signal phrase, use quotation marks around
the quotation and commas around the signal phrase. Place periods and
commas that belong to the quotation inside the quotation marks.

Example 1: Smith shows us the importance of good time management skills
when she says, "90% of A and B students begin their essays at least two
weeks before they are due" (Flynn).

Example 2: "Many students," Smith says, "leave insufficient time for
writing assignments" (Flynn).

Parenthetical citation:

Cite the source of your quotation with a correct parenthetical citation.
See the

MLA Documentation and Format

to learn more about citation.

Practice using a quotation you found in the previous exercise by
introducing the quotation with a signal phrase, stating the quotation,
and punctuating it correctly. Then introduce the signal phrase in the
middle of the quotation, and punctuate it correctly.
