m00076

73753f4d-1b4d-4b51-9310-ccfcb9a9df52

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain the role of sociohistorical context, including cultural and
linguistic variations, in the review genre.

Identify and act on opportunities to publish a review.

Reviewing, and evaluation and analysis more generally, often involves
showing understanding of sociohistorical context. In other words, the
work you are reviewing was created at a particular time for a specific
audience. The film *Black Panther*, for example*,* was released in 2018
for a primarily American audience, but viewers and reviewers can delve
further into this film's cultural context.

For one thing, this film can be placed in the context of other films
from the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). The MCU features characters
from Marvel comic books and began with the release of *Iron Man* in
2008. In addition to the *Avengers* films, the MCU includes
character-specific "origin story" films of which *Black Panther* is a
part. Characters from one film may appear as characters in other MCU
films.

In addition, *Black Panther* is part of a touchstone cultural moment.
Since the beginning of the Black Lives Matter (2013--present) movement,
more attention has been called to the lack of Black representation in
films and TV. The film's Black Panther, played by Chadwick Boseman, is a
Black superhero who gives Black moviegoers a chance to see a superhero
who looks like them. The film also comments on Black poverty and
questions whether power and wealth should be shared or hoarded. The film
also provides audiences of other backgrounds and ethnicities with the
opportunity to witness characters who are developed beyond their
stereotypes, as Caelia Marshall points out regarding the character of
Killmonger in the [Annotated Student Sample](#). These elements work to
create empathy within a multicultural society.

# Offensive Language: When Is It Offensive and When Is It Artful? {#sect-00002}

The question of language as a reflection of culture often surfaces in
writing and reviewing dialogue, whether in film or books. *When is
offensive language gratuitous, and when does it serve an artistic
purpose?* The answer is never clear-cut in such areas, but as a reviewer
you can ask yourself certain questions to determine whether you think it
enhances the work. The basic, if simplified, question is this: *Does the
work lose its strength, honesty, sense of reality, or characterization
if offensive language is removed?* If the answer is *yes,* then the
language serves an artistic purpose. Imagine, for example, dramas
dealing with criminals involved in organized crime. The offensive
language seems natural and contributes to the drama's realism. Take away
the language, and that realism is lost. Other films, however, would lose
nothing in character depiction or realism if offensive language were
omitted---not substituted for something less offensive.

# Diversity in Hollywood {#sect-00003}

Recently, more attention is being paid to diversity in television and
movies. The #OscarsSoWhite controversy began after the 2015 Oscars,
following two consecutive years of all White nominees in the leading and
supporting actor categories. The uproar brought awareness to the lack of
diversity in Hollywood, and not just in terms of actors. Conversations
about diversity behind the scenes began as well.

One criticism the #OscarsSoWhite controversy brought to light was about
the stories Hollywood tells. *Whose stories get told, and who gets to
tell those stories?* While a limited number of people of color have been
nominated for and even won Oscars, traditionally they have been for
movies about racism and slavery (written by White writers or directed by
White directors) and stereotypical roles such as the "magic negro" (a
Black character who helps a White character). Who gets to decide what
stories are made into movies became a major subject of conversation, as
the people who fund movies are also typically White.

The movie *Green Book* (2018) illustrates the backlash that can happen
when movies fail to include enough diverse voices. The film is about a
Black pianist (played by Mahershala Ali, b. 1974) and his White driver
(played by Viggo Mortensen, b. 1958) traveling the country in 1962. The
movie won the Oscar for Best Picture that year, and Ali won an Oscar for
Best Supporting Actor. However, criticism of the movie was aired both
before and after the Oscars ceremony. The family of the real-life
pianist, Don Shirley (1927--2013), said the filmmakers worked with them
very little. Some criticized the movie for seeming to be more about the
driver, Frank Vallelonga (1930--2013), than about Shirley. The movie's
director, Peter Farrelly (b. 1956), is a White man better known for
directing raunchy comedies than movies about the Civil Rights era.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

All of these points highlighted the importance of diversity not only on
set, but among those who participate in the voting bodies of the Oscars
and Golden Globe Awards. As a result, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts
and Sciences, which chooses the nominees and winners of the Oscars, and
the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, which chooses the nominees and
winners of the Golden Globe Awards, introduced measures to diversify
their ranks. Despite promises to diversify, however, it was revealed in
2021 that the HFPA had no Black members. As a result, NBC decided to
stop broadcasting the Golden Globe awards, and some prominent
celebrities, such as Tom Cruise (b. 1962), sent their awards back.

Hollywood has been a White, male-dominated industry. Movie critics Gene
Siskel and Roger Ebert, mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, were
two of the most influential critics in film history. For most of
Hollywood's history, White men have influenced how television and movies
have been received. This situation has been changing, as the Internet
and increased cultural awareness are helping to create more diversity.
For example, National Public Radio [Pop Culture Happy Hour](#) regularly
invites people of color, women, and LGBTQ people onto its panel. Their
views on gender, race, and queerness in movies and television provide
perspectives often missing from mainstream criticism.

# Publish Your Work {#sect-00004}

After you have written and revised your essay, share it with the world.
One easy way to share is to post a condensed version of your essay
online. Here are some sites to consider, depending on the genre and
medium of your review subject.

*Books*

Amazon

Good Reads

Barnes and Noble

*Films*

Rotten Tomatoes

Internet Movie Database

The AV Club

For

The AV Club

, consider participating in a conversation about the subject of your
review by posting in the comments section of a review.

*Video games*

GameStop

Amazon

*Podcasts*

Google Podcasts

Stitcher

*TV shows*

Amazon

The AV Club

Internet Movie Database

You can also seek out other opportunities to share your writing in local
newspapers and magazines. Contact the editor of your college,
alternative weekly, or daily newspaper and ask whether they accept
freelance work.
