m00077

352c4dda-4960-47b3-9933-a76d7f813e17

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Reflect in writing on the development of composing processes.

Explain how those processes affect your work.

As you prepare to place this chapter's writing task in your portfolio,
reflect on your review by answering the following questions.

On what basis did you choose your topic? Did you choose it because of a
long-standing interest in films, TV, books, or video games or because of
something else?

Did your evaluation and thesis seem obvious from the beginning, or did
you have to think for a long time before settling on them?

What made this topic personally appealing?

What was easy about composing your essay? What was hard?

What would you do differently if you could start over again?

In what ways did you revise your essay between the first and final
drafts?

How did you get ideas for revision? Was it from peer feedback, your
instructor, or a tutor?

# Reflective Task {#sect-00002}

Now write a reflection for your portfolio, adding a section about your
interest in the genre of the primary source you chose. Discuss your
reflection with another student, noting areas of similarities and
differences.

# Further Reading {#sect-00003}

Onion, Rebecca. "*Midsommar*'s Real Villains Aren't Murderous Pagans.
They're Grad Students." *Slate*, 12 July 2019,
slate.com/culture/2019/07/midsommar-graduate-students-villains-ari-aster.html.

Paskin, Willa. "In Its Immensely Satisfying Season Finale, *Game of
Thrones* Became the Show It Has Always Tried Not to Be." *Slate*, 27
June 2016,
slate.com/culture/2016/06/game-of-thrones-season-6-finale-reviewed.html.

Siede, Caroline. "A Not-Quite-Live Rent Is A Lovingly Imperfect
Celebration of a Lovingly Imperfect Musical." *The AV Club,* 28 Jan.
2019,
tv.avclub.com/a-not-quite-live-rent-is-a-lovingly-imperfect-celebrati-1832113330.

Ugwu, Reggie. "The Hashtag That Changed the Oscars: An Oral History."
*The New York Times*, 9 Sept. 2020,
www.nytimes.com/2020/02/06/movies/oscarssowhite-history.html.

VanDerWerff, Emily. "Why Cultural Criticism Matters." *Vox*, 31 Dec.
2018,
www.vox.com/culture/2018/12/31/18152275/criticism-explained-cultural-writing.

Wilkinson, Alissa. "Netflix's Totally Delightful *Set It Up* Proves Just
How Durable the Romcom Formula Is." *Vox*, 5 July 2018,
www.vox.com/summer-movies/2018/6/29/17513562/set-it-up-review-netflix-romantic-comedy-romcom.

# Works Cited {#sect-00004}

Castillejo, Esther, and Allie Yang. "Fauci to David Muir: 'Universal
Wearing of Masks' Essential to Combat COVID-19 Spread." *ABC News*, 10
Aug. 2020,
abcnews.go.com/US/fauci-david-muir-universal-wearing-masks-essential-combat/story?id=72294374.

Cooke, Rachel. "Michiko Kakutani: 'It Is More Rewarding to Debate Than
Hit Delete.'" *The Guardian*, 17 Oct. 2020,
www.theguardian.com/books/2020/oct/17/michiko-kakutani-it-is-more-rewarding-to-debate-than-hit-delete.

Gocsik, Karen, and Dave Monahan. *Writing About Movies*. W.W. Norton and
Co., 2018.

Griggs, Brandon. "Harvey's Devastating Impact by the Numbers." *CNN*, 1
Sept. 2017,
www.cnn.com/2017/08/27/us/harvey-impact-by-the-numbers-trnd/index.html.

Jones, Nate. "How *Green Book* and *Bohemian Rhapsody* Became This
Year's Oscar Villains." *Vulture*, 16 Jan. 2019,
www.vulture.com/2019/01/the-oscars-green-book-and-bohemian-rhapsody-controversy.html.

Kakutani, Michiko. "'The Death of Expertise' Explores How Ignorance
Became a Virtue." *The New York Times*, 21 March 2017,
www.nytimes.com/2017/03/21/books/the-death-of-expertise-explores-how-ignorance-became-a-virtue.html.

\-\--. "The Handmaid's Thriller: In 'The Testaments,' There's a Spy in
Gilead." *The New York Times*, 3 Sept. 2019,
www.nytimes.com/2019/09/03/books/review/testaments-margaret-atwood-handmaids-tale.html.

\-\--. "James Comey Has a Story to Tell. It's Very Persuasive." *The New
York Times*, 12 April 2018,
www.nytimes.com/2018/04/12/books/review/james-comey-a-higher-loyalty.html.

Magary, Drew. "I Tested the Dumbest PPE of All Time---The Rich Guy COVID
Helmet." *SFGate*, 15 Jan. 2021,
www.sfgate.com/culture/editorspicks/article/drew-magary-coronavirus-helmet-microclimate-air-15867960.php.
