m00175

e88bda91-aa76-4cca-bd1e-7fb5790f1a92

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Reflecting on your work is an important step in your growth as a writer.
Reflection allows you to recognize the ways in which you have mastered
some skills and have addressed instances when your intention and
execution fail to match. By recognizing previous challenges and applying
learned strategies for addressing them, you demonstrate improvement and
progress as a writer. This kind of reflection is an example of
[recursive](#). At this point in the semester, you know that writing is
a recursive process: you prewrite, you write, you revise, you edit, you
reflect, you revise, and so on. In working through a writing assignment,
you learn and understand more about particular sections of your draft,
and you can go back and revise them. The ability to return to your
writing and exercise objectivity and honesty about it is one of skills
you have practiced during this journey. You are now able to evaluate
your own work, accept another's critique of your writing, and make
meaningful revisions.

In this chapter, you will review your work from earlier chapters and
write a reflection that captures your growth, feelings, and challenges
as a writer. In your reflection, you will apply many of the writing,
reasoning, and evidentiary strategies you have already used in other
papers---for example, analysis, evaluation, comparison and contrast,
problem and solution, cause and effect, examples, and anecdotes.

When looking at your earlier work, you may find that you cringe at those
papers and wonder what you were thinking when you wrote them. If given
that same assignment, you now would know how to produce a more polished
paper. This response is common and is evidence that you have learned
quite a bit about writing.
