m00177

7cfce7f9-44ac-4684-bd89-c1ab9a1d7d48

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify and analyze an author's reflections.

Demonstrate the ability to think critically about a writer's
reflections.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

"She experiments, creating a text that is as succinct and flexible as
poetry, snapping sentences into fragments."
::::

# Finding a Home in Writing {#sect-00002}

Poet and novelist Sandra Cisneros (b. 1954) is best known for her novel
*The House on Mango Street* (1983). Born in Chicago, Illinois, Cisneros
was the only girl in a family of seven children. When she was a child,
her father moved the family several times between Chicago and Mexico
City, the capital of Mexico. With these moves back and forth between the
two countries, Cisneros felt detached from both cultures, forcing her to
create her own path to understand herself better.

In school, Cisneros was encouraged to write poems and quickly became
known for her writing. However, her interest in writing did not fully
take hold until college, when she took a creative writing course. She
graduated with a BA from Loyola University in Chicago in 1976 and earned
an MFA from the Writers' Workshop at the University of Iowa in 1978.
While there, she had an epiphany: "I was in this class, we were talking
about memory and the imagination,... and I realized: 'My god, I'm...
different from everybody in this classroom'" (Rodríguez Aranda 65). This
important reflection encouraged Cisneros to write about what others
could not: her own experience. The unique part poetry, part prose
writing style that she crafted to relay her experiences eventually found
its place among traditional literary genres, giving voice to the once
voiceless.

In her memoir, [*A House of My Own: Stories from My Life*](#) (2015),
Cisneros reflects on her journey as a writer through subjects such as
autonomy, home, culture, and environment. She does so by introducing her
memories, which develop into a kind of dialogue between the young writer
she once was and the successful writer she is today. In the title essay,
"A House of My Own"---originally the introduction to the 25th
anniversary edition of *The House on Mango Street*---Cisneros writes,
"The young woman in this photograph is me.... She thinks stories are
about beauty." By describing herself in the third person from the
vantage point of herself as a successful writer, Cisneros creates space
for reflection---the act of thinking about the arc of her life. She
wonders how this young woman with so many fears had the courage to chart
her own path in life. Upon reflection, previously unexamined gifts from
her parents provide some answers. In *A House of My Own,* Cisneros says
that she became a writer because of her mother, "who was unhappy being a
mother" and was "banging on the bars of her cell all her life," and
because of her father, who wanted Cisneros to marry and have babies and
so didn't mind if she "majored in something silly like English": "In a
sense, everything I have ever written has been for him, to win his
approval." Cisneros's reflection suggests that in some ways, her life
has been about rebirthing herself into a form that her mother would be
proud of and a form her father would come to understand---a form beyond
the circumstances of her original birth.

This reflective dialogue across time mirrors the way in which Cisneros
sees herself: as someone who writes from multiple perspectives. Being an
American and a Mexican, she writes in two languages and uses elements of
both cultures to create characters that she picks up from memory, chance
meetings, visits to various places, and dreams. She cobbles these parts
together to form a title or maybe just a first line, giving her mind
time to percolate, waiting for the rest of the story to emerge. This is
the work of reflection---giving oneself time to think, to make
connections, to feel, and to put words to ideas.

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00003}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
