m00178

934c6b29-910a-4aeb-b7ba-0c8ff5ee518e

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify conventions of reflection regarding structure, paragraphing,
and tone.

Articulate how genre conventions are shaped by purpose, culture, and
expectation.

Adapt composing processes for a variety of technologies and modalities.

Reflective writing is the practice of thinking about an event, an
experience, a memory, or something imagined and expressing its larger
meaning in written form. Reflective writing comes from the author's
specific perspective and often contemplates the way an event (or
something else) has affected or even changed the author's life.

# Areas of Exploration {#sect-00002}

When you write a reflective piece, consider three main areas of
exploration as shown in [\#](#). The first is the happening. This area
consists of the events included in the reflection. For example, you will
be examining writing assignments from this course. As you describe the
assignments, you also establish context for the reflection so that
readers can understand the circumstances involved. For each assignment,
ask yourself these questions: *What was the assignment? How did I
approach the assignment? What did I do to start this assignment? What
did I think about the assignment?* If you think of other questions, use
them. Record your answers because they will prove useful in the second
area.

The second area is reflection. When you reflect on the happening, you go
beyond simply writing about the specific details of the assignment; you
move into the writing process and an explanation of what you learned
from doing the work. In addition, you might recognize---and note---a
change in your skills or way of thinking. Ask yourself these questions:
*What works effectively in this text? What did I learn from this
assignment? How is this assignment useful? How did I feel when I was
working on this assignment?* Again, you can create other questions, and
note your responses because you will use them to write a reflection.

The third area is action. Here, you decide what to do next and plan the
steps needed to reach that goal. Ask yourself: *What does (and does not)
work effectively in this text? How can I continue to improve in this
area? What should I do now? What has changed in my thinking? How would I
change my approach to this assignment if I had to do another one like
it?* Base your responses to these questions on what you have learned,
and implement these elements in your writing.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Format of Reflective Writing {#sect-00003}

Unlike thesis statements, which often come at the beginning of an essay,
the main point of a piece of reflective writing may be conveyed only
indirectly and nearly always emerges at the end, almost like an
epiphany, or sudden realization. With this structure, readers are drawn
into the act of reflecting and become more curious about what the writer
is thinking and feeling. ln other words, reflective writers are musing,
exploring, or wondering rather than arguing. In fact, reflective essays
are most enlightening when they are not obviously instructive or
assertive. However, even though reflective writing does not present an
explicit argument, it still includes evidence and cohesion and provides
lessons to be learned. As such, elements of persuasion or argument often
appear in reflective essays.

## Discovery through Writing {#sect-00004}

Keep in mind, too, that when you start to reflect on your growth as a
writer, you may not realize what caused you to explore a particular
memory. In other words, writers may choose to explore an idea, such as
why something got their attention, and only by recalling the details of
that event do they discover the reason it first drew their attention.

When you tell the story of your writing journey this semester, you may
find that more was on your mind than you realized. The writing itself is
one thing, but the meaning of what you learned becomes something else,
and you may deliberately share how that second level, or deeper meaning
or feeling, emerged through the act of storytelling. For example, in
narrating a writing experience, you may step back, pause, and let
readers know, "Wait a minute, something else is going on here." An
explanation of the new understanding, for both you and your readers, can
follow this statement. Such pauses are a sign that connections are being
made---between the present and the past, the concrete and the abstract,
the literal and the symbolic. They signal to readers that the essay or
story is about to move in a new and less predictable direction. Yet each
idea remains connected through the structure of happenings, reflections,
and actions.

Sometimes, slight shifts in voice or tone accompany reflective pauses as
a writer moves closer to what is really on their mind. The exact nature
of these shifts will, of course, be determined by the writer's
viewpoint. Perhaps one idea that you, as the writer, come up with is the
realization that writing a position argument was useful in your history
class. You were able to focus more on the material than on *how* to
write the paper because you already knew how to craft a position
argument. As you work through this process, continue to note these
important little discoveries.

## Your Writing Portfolio {#sect-00005}

As you recall, each chapter in this book has included one or more
assignments for a writing portfolio. In simplest terms, a writing
portfolio is a collection of your writing contained within a single
binder or folder. A portfolio may contain printed copy, or it may be
completely digital. Its contents may have been created over a number of
weeks, months, or even years, and it may be organized chronologically,
thematically, or qualitatively. A portfolio assigned for a class will
contain written work to be shared with an audience to demonstrate your
writing, learning, and skill progression. This kind of writing
portfolio, accumulated during a college course, presents a record of
your work over a semester and may be used to assign a grade. Many
instructors now offer the option of, or even require, digital multimodal
portfolios, which include visuals, audio, and/or video in addition to
written texts. Your instructor will provide guidelines on how to create
a multimodal portfolio, if applicable. You can also learn more about
[creating a multimodal portfolio](#) and view one [by a first-year
student](#).

# Key Terms {#sect-00006}

As you begin crafting your reflection, consider these elements of
reflective writing.

Analysis

:

When you analyze your own writing, you explain your reasoning or writing
choices, thus showing that you understand your progress as a writer.

Context

:

The context is the circumstances or situation in which the happening
occurred. A description of the assignment, an explanation of why it was
given, and any other relevant conditions surrounding it would be its
context.

Description

:

Providing specific details, using figurative language and imagery, and
even quoting from your papers helps readers visualize and thus share
your reflection. When describing, writers may include visuals if
applicable.

Evaluation

:

An effective evaluation points out where you faltered and where you did
well. With that understanding, you have a basis to return to your
thoughts and speculate about progress you will continue to make in the
future.

Observation

:

Observation is a close look at the writing choices you made and the way
you managed the rhetorical situations you encountered. When observing,
be objective, and pay attention to the more and less effective parts of
your writing.

Purpose

:

By considering the goals of these previous assignments, you will be
better equipped to look at them critically and objectively to understand
their larger use in academia.

Speculation

:

Speculation encourages you to think about your next steps: where you
need to improve and where you need to stay sharp to avoid recurring
mistakes.

Thoughts:

Your thoughts (and feelings) before, during, and after an assignment can
provide you with descriptive material. In a reflective essay, writers
may choose to indicate their thoughts in a different tense from the one
in which they write the essay itself.

When you put these elements together, you will be able to reflect
objectively on your own writing. This reflection might include
identifying areas of significant improvement and areas that still need
more work. In either case, focus on describing, analyzing, and
evaluating *how* and *why* you did or did not improve. This is not an
easy task for any writer, but it proves valuable for those who aim to
improve their skills as communicators.
