m00179

217e8f17-2eea-4e47-ad6a-0ef4e859f6d6

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify and analyze the elements and organizational pattern of a
reflective essay.

Demonstrate the ability to think critically about a writer's
reflections.

# Introduction {#sect-00002}

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

[Dale Trumbore](#) (b. 1987) is a Southern California composer and
writer. In addition to composing for chorus and orchestra, Trumbore
often writes reflectively about artistic conflict and its resolution. In
her book *Staying Composed* (2019), she writes about the anxiety and
self-doubt that often accompany a career in the arts: "You have to be
willing to be a little vulnerable. Real people are flawed." In the
following blog post, she reflects on gender in her career field.

# Womanhood and Composition {#sect-00003}

I am a female composer. As such, my compositions have been programmed on
a concert about motherhood, though I do not have children; neither did
most of the other women programmed on that concert. I've been asked
mid-composition to change the theme of a piece, so the commission would
relate to womanhood. (I did, but I didn't rewrite the minute-and-a-half
of music I'd composed back when the commission's theme was "outer
space.") I've been asked to sum up what it means to be a woman in a
one-minute piece; I tried, but that piece ended up being about exactly
how impossible the task is.

Establishing Context. *Trumbore sets up the conditions for this
reflective essay by mentioning some of the challenges she has
encountered and what she has done about them. She also mentions the
difficulty of trying to "sum up" the entirety of her experience as a
woman.*

The hundredth anniversary of the ratification of the 19th Amendment...
in 2020... and the aftermath of the #MeToo movement have created a
perfect storm of what I think of as Lady Composer Commissions: pieces
that ask the composer to reflect the experience of being a woman in her
work. Equally popular these days is the Lady Composer Concert, which 1)
features works by composers who identify as women, and 2) connects the
music of these composers for no reason other than that they all share a
gender identity.

Context. *By providing additional context, Trumbore gives readers some
background information and insight into the focus of the essay.*

Promotion of these concerts on social media often goes like this: "We're
so excited to feature the work of Lady Composer 1, Lady Composer 2, Lady
Composer 3, Lady Composer 4 \[etc.\]!" The general tone of these posts
seems to be: "Look at all of the women we rounded up! We found so many
of them!" When I am tagged in these posts, I never know whether to share
them, like them, or un-tag myself as quickly as possible and hope the
conductor doesn't notice.

Observation. *Trumbore points to part of the social and culture
disparity between genders and questions how to respond. This reflection
shows awareness of her discomfort and uncertainty about larger
meanings.*

Now, I know these concerts mean well, and I would certainly never tell
anyone to stop programming the works of underrepresented composers. As
someone who relies on commissions and royalties to pay the rent, I'm
also grateful to have my music programmed on any concert at all. But
every time I'm tagged in a post for a concert like this---with no theme
other than "Here's A Bunch of Lady Composers"---I feel as though someone
has drawn a sharp-edged square around my identity. I am positive that
these concerts are programmed with earnest and kind intentions;
nevertheless, they make me wonder whether any conductor thinks I want to
be programmed like this, like I am some exotic and fragile butterfly to
be pinned down, labeled appropriately, and locked away in a glass box.

Purpose. *Trumbore uses reflection to see the larger purpose of the
concerts. She also questions that purpose and uses the metaphor of a
butterfly to emphasize the situation as she leads into the main purpose
of the essay.*

One of my two cats, Cotton, is obsessed with catching and eating flies.
He'll stalk one around our small house for hours before he finally
catches and eats the thing, and he's nearly always more preoccupied with
the stalking than the meal itself. But immediately after he's finally
caught one, he comes over to my husband or me and meows, wanting
recognition for his work: a gentle pat on the head, maybe, or a "Good
job!" In our house, we call this routine "congrats," as in: "Cotton just
swallowed his second fly of the day, then came over for more congrats."

Vignette and Description. *Trumbore breaks the flow of the essay with a
vignette---a brief scene---offering a look into her life. The vignette
connects this part of the essay with the next and establishes a concrete
example of her feelings.*

This is exactly how the Lady Composer Concerts and their inevitable
social media promotion have started to feel to me: like they are an
elaborate exercise in seeking congrats. They are not programmed with the
audience in mind; if anything, they come off as self-congratulatory.
("Look how woke we are!") If these concerts were serving the audience,
they would have a theme beyond "a bunch of women wrote this music."

Metaphor. *Trumbore compares the cat's "congrats" routine with the
promotion of the concerts.*

Purpose. *In addition, she reiterates the larger purpose of the essay by
highlighting the topic of gender disparity.*

All you need to do to find this concept ridiculous, of course, is to
flip the gender: Imagine a conductor saying that any random collection
of pieces clearly belong together on the same program, because they all
were written by men.

Analysis and Evaluation. *Trumbore defines what is* not *a valid concert
theme and suggests that readers consider a new position---to judge the
gender inequality situation among composers as she does.*

I am certainly not the first person to talk about this; I give the above
example of gender-flipping whenever I talk about Lady Composer Concerts,
and I've heard other friends do the same. Still, every time I bring this
up, I hope it will be for the last time: "Music by Women" is not a
theme. Collecting a bunch of pieces written by female composers does not
in and of itself constitute an inspired concert program. It certainly
doesn't deserve congrats.

Analysis. *Defining what she considers a theme, Trumbore continues to
explain her position and elaborate on the reality she experiences.*

If you're called to promote the work of composers who identify as women,
consider---the same as you would with any other program---what the music
and/or texts have in common. What's the through-line of this music or
collection of texts, regardless of the gender of who wrote it? Is the
experience of hearing these particular compositions enhanced by virtue
of their sharing a program? Does the order of the program present a
narrative? Are there any other pieces, including pieces by composers who
identify as men, that would better round out this particular program?

Analysis. *These questions engage the reader and beg for answers while
again pointing to her reflection on the concerts.*

Speculation. *Further, she is hinting at a way of changing the status
quo in the questions she asks.*

Whenever I discuss "Women in Music"---something else I'm often asked to
do---I'm struck once again by the fact that we're somehow still having
the conversation about the lack of Lady Composers. I feel conflicted
whenever I'm asked to talk about the role of women in music; I wish we
didn't need to have that discussion, and I resent being asked to talk
about it over and over again. At the same time, if I'd like to hear more
conversations in the classical music world about systemic
inequality---and I would---I have to be willing to talk about this
myself.

Thoughts and Speculation. *Trumbore notes her frustrations with
discussions focused on gender and music and then suggests that she would
rather focus on the inequalities if she would be willing to discuss this
issue.*

But a single Lady Composer Concert is unlikely to single-handedly
resolve the fact that for centuries, classical music has revered the
music of white, mostly dead, usually European men as the highest quality
music of all time. In Music History classes, most of us are taught that
this is the worthiest music to study. In Music Theory classes, we
analyze these scores. Whenever we sing in a chorus, we are at the mercy
of what our conductor presents as the worthiest music, and if that is
exclusively the work of white and dead and European and male composers,
who can blame us for subconsciously thinking that this is the music most
worthy of programming?

Thoughts and Context. *Trumbore reflects on her education and notes some
of the problematic, and perhaps sexist, elements of music education.
Note again her use of questions to involve readers.*

We don't (just) have a lack of Lady Composers or a dearth of Lady
Composer Concerts. We have an entire educational system designed to
teach us to esteem the music of dead white men above the music of all
other composers.

Analysis and Evaluation. *Trumbore responds to her own question and
expands her rationale of reconsidering music education. In addition, the
brevity of this paragraph encourages readers to focus on the larger
message in the last sentence.*

So I'm more than happy to congratulate anyone championing the work of
historically underrepresented composers. Yes, please! Let's talk about
systemic oppression and racism and the discrimination that composers who
are not white and/or male have faced for centuries. Let's talk about
implicit bias and financial privilege and how all of it affects which
voices we perceive as most worthy of our attention.

Speculation. *Trumbore drives home the point of the previous paragraph
and makes it more explicit for readers, indicating what she would like
to see happen.*

And yet it's equally important to acknowledge that no single concert
will fix that systematic imbalance. If it was going to, the Lady
Composer Concert would have already done this, because the Lady Composer
Concert has been around for decades. The Lady Composer Concert is a
stale concept; we've tried it already, and we're still having this
conversation.

Speculation. *In this paragraph, Trumbore suggests a potentially new
direction and opportunity, on which she elaborates in the next
paragraph. In other words, through this reflection, she has arrived at a
new way of seeing the world.*

I want to propose an idea that is new, though. If you truly want to
champion the works of historically underrepresented composers, what
would it look like if you did the loudest work behind the scenes?

What if you had bold conversations about why you feel compelled to
program more historically underrepresented groups of composers, but for
the concert itself, you presented your program the same way you would
any other program---highlighting the specific compositions, thematic
material, and the reasons that your audience should come hear this
music?

What if you championed compositions written by these composers without
needing to mention their race or gender as part of the promotion of your
concert? What if you identified instead what you find most meaningful,
exceptional, and unique about their compositions?

And what if you told your peers about these works that you love? Over
time, maybe that specificity---naming the pieces you love, not just a
string of composers' names---would eliminate another common problem I've
heard conductors discuss: trouble finding quality repertoire written by
underrepresented composers.

Analysis and Speculation. *After a series of thoughtful questions about
underrepresented groups of composers, Trumbore provides a way to move
forward, not by giving directions, but by asking questions that lead
readers to obvious answers.*

If you're having trouble finding such repertoire, let your peers and
friend-colleagues know that you're searching for this work. Ask for
recommendations. You can always reach out to composers directly with
requests for perusal scores, too. I'm always more than happy to send
along perusals when conductors are looking for new works, and I'm even
happier if I'm asked for works that fit a specific theme. Getting to
know a new composer's work can be as simple as sending them a quick
email through their website's contact form. Ask if they have any pieces
that might be a good fit for your upcoming concert season's themes. You
might even name some of the other works you already have in mind for
that program and see if that composer can recommend compatible works
from their catalogue.

Thoughts and Speculation. *This paragraph continues setting up a way to
move forward and helps connect it to the previous paragraphs. It reveals
more of Trumbore's thoughts on what she wants to do and her ability to
do it.*

Truth be told, I don't want to write another piece about "being a
woman." I want to write pieces about emotions that are hard to capture
in words but easy to express in music, because music has room to hold a
staggering amount of complexity and nuance. I want to be given
commissions with specific concert themes, even oddly specific ones.
Especially oddly-specific ones; please, give me your commissions for
works with texts about weddings that must also include percussion, or
pieces to pair with Taiwanese music about the sea.

Evaluation. *Trumbore begins to use pathos and urges readers to
understand her position. She also explains how she works and what works
best for her.*

I will rise to each challenge; this is what I do for a living, and I'm
good at my job. I'll find a text that adheres to each theme and write
the best music I can write at this moment in time. I do this best when I
don't also have to wonder whether I am single-handedly summing up the
entirety of what it means to "be a woman." If the texts I choose or the
music I write happens to capture some aspect of the female
experience---of a female experience---great. Still, that will have been
my decision to make.

Thoughts. *In reflecting, Trumbore acknowledges what she needs to do
next and begins to gain momentum by describing specific activities to
meet her goals.*

When you program the works of underrepresented composers, don't act like
my cat does with a freshly-caught fly. Don't proudly rattle off the
names of women in a Facebook post like you've hunted down their music
and are laying it at the feet of your audience. Your audience deserves
better; they deserve a concert with an actual theme.

Coherence. *By bringing back the cat, Trumbore reminds readers of the
"congrats" metaphor she established earlier as she continues to advocate
for needed change.*

When it comes time to promote the work of historically underrepresented
composers, present their compositions---these works you've come to
love---as you would any other excellent repertoire. Shout from the
rooftops why you love each composition. Tell your colleagues and
friends. Tell your board members. Tell your audience. And once you have,
don't expect congratulations for doing so. You don't need or deserve
praise simply for doing your job as a conductor. After all, programming
music that you admire and respect---sharing that music, teaching that
music, advocating for that music---is reward enough. Isn't it?

Speculation. *In this concluding paragraph, Trumbore encourages action
toward implementing her points, or at the very least toward a different
way of thinking. The reflection encourages readers, too, to reflect on
their feelings, their experiences, and potential ways to change or
improve.*

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00004}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
