m00181

5eca92d8-773a-4aeb-b46a-2f4ec034d67c

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Demonstrate knowledge of linguistic structures, including grammar.

Implement appropriate pronouns in written work.

You likely use [Pronouns](#) ---words that substitute for nouns or noun
phrases---in every text that you write, including this portfolio
reflection. Pronouns are one of the eight main parts of speech, the
others being nouns, verbs, adverbs, adjectives, prepositions,
conjunctions, and interjections.

# Reference, Antecedent, and Case {#sect-00002}

## Reference {#sect-00003}

Pronoun reference is the practice of using pronouns to replace nouns.
The important thing to know about pronoun reference is that every
pronoun must match the noun it replaces in terms of gender and number.
Gender refers to the noun as either masculine, feminine, or neuter.

*Masculine: Jorge* is an educated man. *He* is Toby's neighbor.

*Feminine:* Rico's *sister* decided to go skating. *She* came back
early.

*Neuter:* The *car* has four new *tires*. *It* runs much better with
*them*.

However, if you're not certain of someone's gender identity or don't
want to project it on them, use the gender-neutral pronouns *them*,
*they*, and *their*. See [Spotlight on... Pronouns in Context](#) for
more about using gender-neutral pronouns.

*Gender neutral:* Pat likes to eat pizza. They like pineapple and bacon
with lots of cheese.

*Number* means singular or plural.

*Singular:* Toby has *one daughter*. *She* is studying art.

*Plural:* Jorge has *two children*. *They* go to the same school.

In addition to gender and number, clarity is often a major issue when
using pronouns. For example: *When Lizzie smacked her arm into the glass
window, she broke it.* Did Lizzie break her arm, or did she break the
window? In this case, the reference is not clear. One way to clarify the
meaning would be to write the sentence this way: *Lizzie broke the
window when she smacked her arm into it*.

## Antecedent {#sect-00004}

The antecedent is the noun, nouns, or other pronoun or pronouns that the
pronoun replaces. The antecedent usually appears earlier in the sentence
or in a previous sentence, and the pronoun appears later in the same
sentence or in another sentence.

*Example 1:* Although my *friends* tease me about my dancing style, I
love *them* anyway.

*Example 2:* *Mariah* said *she* wanted to go home.

*Example 3:* The *car* was far away. Jessica couldn't see what model
*it* was.

## Case {#sect-00005}

Pronoun case refers to the grammatical function of the pronoun in a
sentence. Pronouns that are the subjects (the person, place, or thing
that performs the action of the verb or represents what or whom sentence
is about) of a sentence are written in the subjective case. For example:
I *like pizza*. Pronouns that are objects (nouns or pronouns affected by
the action of a verb) of a sentence or preposition are written in the
objective case. For example: *Laura gave *him** *the baseball. Jorge and
Toby were standing in front of *us** *in line*. Lastly, possessive
pronouns pronouns show ownership and are written in the possessive case.
For example: *The cat picked up *its** *toy. Those notes are *his** *and
*mine*.*

You already know that you cannot have a sentence without a subject and
that subjects and objects in sentences must be nouns or pronouns.
Remember, a pronoun is a stand-in for a noun. It is always playing
substitute for a noun or nouns "already out there somewhere." Imagine
writing without pronouns:

When *Marcy* woke this morning, *Marcy* had a headache, so *Marcy* went
to *Marcy's* medicine cabinet and took one of *Marcy's* headache pills
that *Marcy's* doctor had prescribed for *Marcy*.

Instead:

When Marcy woke this morning, *she* had a headache, so *she* went to
*her* medicine cabinet and took one of *her* headache pills that *her*
doctor had prescribed for *her*.

# Types of Pronouns {#sect-00006}

When you think of pronouns, personal pronouns such as those discussed in
the previous section, referring to a specific person or object, are
likely the first that come to mind. However, the world of pronouns
extends to reflexive, indefinite, and demonstrative pronouns as well.

## Personal Pronouns {#sect-00007}

Knowing the difference between subject personal pronouns and object
personal pronouns will help you use them correctly.

  *Form*         *First Person*        *Second Person*   *Third Person*
  -------------- --------------------- ----------------- -------------------------------
  *Subject*      I, we                 you               he, she, it, they
  *Object*       me, us                you               him, her, it, them
  *Possessive*   my, mine, our, ours   your, yours       his, hers, its, their, theirs

+--------------------+-------------------+
| *Subject Position* | *Object Position* |
+====================+===================+
| I                  | me                |
|                    |                   |
| you                | you               |
|                    |                   |
| she                | her               |
|                    |                   |
| he                 | him               |
|                    |                   |
| it                 | it                |
|                    |                   |
| we                 | us                |
|                    |                   |
| they               | them              |
|                    |                   |
| who                | whom              |
|                    |                   |
| whoever            | whomever          |
+--------------------+-------------------+

Seeing both versions across from each other helps emphasize that each
personal pronoun has its counterpart. In other words, if it isn't *we*,
then it is *us*, and if it isn't *me*, then it is *I*.

*Correct* → She *is such a sweet little dog*.

*Incorrect* *→ *Her** *is such a sweet little dog.*

It is fairly obvious here which pronoun is correct. You have been saying
it correctly all along, probably without being able to articulate the
grammatical rule that made you do so. However, knowing the subject or
object distinction can be especially helpful in knowing whether to use
*I* or *me*. People often make mistakes when a sentence has a plural
object. For example:

Jasmine and *I* ordered pizza for dinner. The pizza was delivered to
Jasmine and *me*.

In the first sentence, the plural subject is *Jasmine* and *I*. *I* is
the subject personal pronouns. In the second sentence, *me* is an object
of the preposition (*to*), and the object personal pronoun---*me*---is
correct. If the second sentence had the singular object pronoun *me*, no
problem would arise. You would simply say that the pizza was delivered
*to me*, not *to I*. Remember that an object personal pronoun stays an
object personal pronoun no matter how many other objects are part of it.

## Reflexive Pronouns {#sect-00008}

Reflexive pronouns are straightforward. They are pronouns that
"reflect," as an image does in a mirror. They refer to the same person
or thing.

*John* couldn't stop looking at *himself* in the mirror.

*John* is the original noun, or antecedent, and *himself* is the pronoun
that points back at him. Note that reflexive pronouns *always* end in
*self* or *selves*.

  *First Person*      *Second Person*        *Third Person*
  ------------------- ---------------------- --------------------------------------
  myself, ourselves   yourself, yourselves   himself, herself, itself, themselves

## Indefinite Pronouns {#sect-00009}

While reflexive pronouns always refer to themselves---that is, the
subject and object are the same person, place, thing, or
idea---indefinite pronouns are the opposite. As their name suggests,
they are not definite; they are *in*definite and do not refer to
specific nouns. They do get their meaning across, but the nouns they
refer to are not known. These are some of the most common indefinite
pronouns:

+----------+------------+---------+-----------+
| all      | either     | most    | other     |
|          |            |         |           |
| another  | everybody  | much    | several   |
|          |            |         |           |
| any      | everyone   | nobody  | some      |
|          |            |         |           |
| anybody  | everything | none    | somebody  |
|          |            |         |           |
| anything | few        | no one  | someone   |
|          |            |         |           |
| both     | many       | nothing | something |
|          |            |         |           |
| each     | more       | one     |           |
+----------+------------+---------+-----------+

## Demonstrative Pronouns {#sect-00010}

Demonstrative pronouns point directly at something. They use all their
pronoun power to indicate their preference, so much so that when someone
uses a demonstrative pronoun, it is hard *not* to imagine them pointing
at something directly. Good news and bad news come along with
demonstrative pronouns. The good news is that there are only four
demonstrative pronouns: *this*, *that*, *these*, and *those*. The bad
news---and it's not really bad---is that words that commonly play the
role of pronouns are multitalented. The same word can play another role
(part of speech) in a sentence. Sometimes these four words function as
adjectives, which always modify nouns and pronouns. In the sentence
*That is my car*, the word *that* is playing the role of a pronoun. It
is the subject of the sentence. Only nouns or pronouns can be subjects.
However, if the sentence read *That car is mine*, then *that* would be
an adjective because it modifies (tells something about) the noun *car*.

# Common Mix-Ups {#sect-00011}

It's

vs.

its:

This is an easy one to mix up but easy to correct.

It's

means

it is

or

it has

. For example:

It's

a hot day

or

It is

a hot day

.

Its

refers to possession. For example:

This car has

its

problems

. To be sure you are correct, substitute

it is

. To say

The car has

it is

problems

makes no sense, so

its

is correct.

Who

vs.

whom:

Perhaps the most effective way to recognize which to use is to equate

who

to

he

and

whom

to

him

. For example:

Who/Whom

wrote the book?

He

wrote the book

, so

who

is correct. Remember that

whom

is in the objective case. Think about it like this:

whom

is like

them

, so you might say,

This is for them

. Therefore,

This is for whom?

or

Whom is this for?

would be correct.

I

vs.

me:

I

is always a subject;

me

is always an object. So

Demarcus and I left the building

is correct because

I

is the subject. Conversely,

Give the package to me

and

You gave me good advice

are both correct because

me

is an object. Remember to use the correct pronoun with compound objects,
as in the sentence

Reflection has helped other class members and

me

improve our writing

.

In Chapter 20, you have learned how to use different types of pronouns
to substitute for nouns and noun phrases. You have also learned about
common mix-ups when using pronouns.
