m00183

c3b6a52f-f658-412b-9be6-40f0cc217428

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Recognize and avoid gender bias in writing and general language use.

Apply conventions of usage and current terminology to writing, including
gender-neutral pronouns when applicable.

By now, you have a working knowledge of what pronouns are and how to use
them. This section focuses on more nuanced uses of pronouns and their
place in the contemporary world---an emerging field of interest as
people work to develop language that best captures their multiple
identities.

# Eliminating Gender Bias {#sect-00002}

It is important to remember that many thoughtful and powerful
English-language works from the past took masculine words for granted.
English use of words such as *man*, *men*, *he*, *him*, and *his* was,
one would hope, meant to include both men and women. Consider Thomas
Jefferson's "All men are created equal" and Thomas Paine's "These are
the times that try men's souls." The contemporary equivalent of those
words might be "All people are created equal" and "These are the times
that try our souls," which are two of several possible fixes for such
gender exclusivity. When you read historic texts, recognize that the
rules were different then, and the writers are no more at fault than the
culture in which they lived. Contemporary writing, however, should
reflect inclusivity, which in turn reflects the culture in which you
live today. (See [Spotlight on... Bias in Language and Research](#) for
more about language bias.)

As you edit to avoid gender-biased language, you will notice that
English does not have an agreed-upon gender-neutral third-person
singular pronoun to match the gender-neutral third-person plural
pronouns (*they*, *their*, *them*). Writers and speakers use *he*
(*him*, *his*) for men and *she* (*her*, *hers*) for women. In the
sentence "Everybody has his own opinion," the indefinite pronoun
*everybody* needs a singular pronoun to refer to it. Although it is
grammatically correct to say, "Everybody has his own opinion," the
sentence excludes women. But until recently, it was considered
grammatically questionable to write, "Everybody has their own opinion,"
although *their* is gender neutral. When editing, be alert to such
constructions, and consider these ways to use or fix them:

Make the sentence plural: "People have their own opinions."

Include both pronouns

(This solution excludes people who do not fall within a gender binary.):

"Everybody has his or her own opinion."

Eliminate the pronoun: "Everybody has an opinion."

Alternate masculine and feminine pronouns throughout your sentences or
paragraphs, using

she

in one paragraph and

he

in the next. Be careful, though; to avoid confusing readers, you might
change them in each section or chapter.

Most writers have used all of these solutions at one time or another. As
always, use the strategy that makes for the clearest, most graceful
writing.

Additionally, it has become more common and generally accepted to use
*they*, *their*, and *them* as singular pronouns. However, depending on
the context, using a plural pronoun to refer to a single individual can
be confusing to readers when its antecedent is unclear.

# Pronouns for Nonbinary and Transgender People {#sect-00003}

You cannot always know how individuals identify themselves, nor can you
assume their gender is either male or female. The best approach with
people you don't know is simply to ask which pronouns they prefer and to
respect their choice. Some people identify themselves with the pronouns
*they/them/theirs*, and this preference is generally acceptable
politically, socially, and grammatically. Other gender-neutral pronouns
exist as well, such as *ze/hir/hirs*, but they are used less often. If
you are unsure, an option is simply to use the person's name.

If an individual has a specific identity and prefers a masculine,
feminine, or gender-neutral pronoun, there are ways they can inform
people of it. (Notice the use here of *they* as a singular pronoun.) For
example, if one identifies as female*,* that person can include the
pronouns *she/her* as part of their email signature: "Jane Doe
(she/her)." Similarly, a person who identifies as nonbinary can include
the preferred pronouns *they/them/their* in their signature.

## Write about Pronouns {#sect-00004}

Take a moment and write about how pronoun use impacts you. Also, write
about how people understand each other through pronouns, while being
mindful of the differences between people. Think carefully about
perspectives on gender, and be sure to respect other points of view and
interpretations of pronoun use. Finally, explain how pronoun use is an
important component of identity.

As an additional exercise, review your portfolio and (re)consider your
use of pronouns. Your development as a writer and enhanced understanding
of pronouns will provide new insight into their use. *Where might you
have made other decisions about pronouns, and what impact might they
have had?* Consider including these insights in your reflective essay.

## Avoid Discriminatory Language {#sect-00005}

Above all, your writing should not hurt people or exclude any group from
humanity. As you edit, ensure that your language does not discriminate
against categories of people based on gender, race, ethnicity, social
class, or sexual orientation---or anything else.

# Further Reading {#sect-00006}

The following texts provide additional information or examples regarding
reflective writing in various disciplines and settings.

Bolton, Gillie, and Russell Delderfield. *Reflective Practice: Writing
and Professional Development*. 5th ed., Sage Publications, 2018.

Dillard, Annie. *Pilgrim at Tinker Creek*. 1974.Harper Perennial Modern
Classics, 2013.

Stevens, Dannelle D., and Joanne E. Cooper. *Journal Keeping: How to Use
Reflective Writing for Effective Learning, Teaching, Professional
Insight, and Positive Change*. Stylus Publishing, 2009.

Tan, Amy. *Where the Past Begins: A Writer's Memoir*. Ecco, 2017.

Thoreau, Henry David. *Walden.* 1854. *Project Gutenberg*,
www.gutenberg.org/files/205/205-h/205-h.htm.

Williams, Kate, Mary Woolliams, and Jane Spiro. *Reflective Writing*.
2nd ed., Red Globe Press, 2020.

# Works Cited {#sect-00007}

Albritton, Laura. Review of *A House of My Own: Stories from My Life*,
by Sandra Cisneros. *Harvard Review Online*, 15 Mar. 2016,
harvardreview.org/book-review/a-house-of-my-own-stories-from-my-life/.

Cisneros, Sandra. *A House of My Own: Stories from My Life*. Alfred A.
Knopf, 2015.

Rodríguez Aranda, Pilar E. "On the Solitary Fate of Being Mexican,
Female, Wicked and Thirty-Three: An Interview with Writer Sandra
Cisneros." *The Americas Review*, vol. 18, no. 1, Jan. 1990, pp. 63--80.

Trumbore, Dale. "Be a Real Person." *Cantate*, vol. 31, no. 2, Winter
2019, p. 25,
calcda.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/Cantate-winter-19-web.pdf.
