m00028

b439daf9-37a0-4b79-9495-bf9130698729

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

"Literacy is now understood as a means of . . . communication in an
increasingly digital, text-mediated, information-rich, and fast-changing
world," according to UNESCO. The literacy narrative is a genre that
provides an account of an individual or a member of a community and
their experience with learning. Combining the broad definition of
*literacy* with the term *narrative*, or *storytelling*, produces the
literacy narrative: a story that provides an account of a learning
experience. As you begin to reflect on what it means to learn,
particularly in a college setting, this chapter will guide you through
an exploration of the various features of the literacy narrative genre
to prepare you to write one of your own.

One path to becoming familiar with the language of higher institutional
learning, or the academy, is what professors like to call *entering the
academic discourse community.* This phrase means that you begin to
reflect on the experiences that have laid the path for your admission to
this new community. In the traditional sense, when talking about
literacy, people think of reading and writing. However, in the modern
multimedia and kinesthetic world, the definition of *literacy* has been
expanded to mean "competence in communication," including a multitude of
methods, modes, and texts. This emerging definition means that literacy
includes the abilities to compose and interpret messages using images,
visual arrangements, spoken words, and other modes beyond simple written
texts. People are considered literate in almost any concentrated area in
which they demonstrate knowledge and communicate proficiently.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Having this broad understanding of literacy allows individuals to think
about the genre, or writing type, of the literacy narrative in many
ways: ways that are textual, musical, digital, social, communal---the
list continues. What scholars know for certain is that literacy involves
individual as well as community engagement. One does not achieve
literacy through isolation but rather as a result of active engagements
with members of communities.
