m00029

4d778794-5bae-4d9c-aa7f-3642b13744d5

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Use reading and composing for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and
communicating.

Discern the nature of identity in various rhetorical and cultural
contexts.

You likely express your identity, or ideas about who you are, through
language. The language you use also signals the ways in which you are
rooted in specific culture, or groups of people who share common beliefs
and lived experiences. Because the ways in which people speak and write
are closely intertwined with their self-images and community
affiliations, you can think, communicate, and interact most freely with
others by using your personal idiolect---that is, your individual way of
speaking and writing---which is based in cultural language use. This
section examines a few myths about language use and explores some
productive ways to think about language and communication.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Language and Identity {#sect-00002}

As members of different communities, most Americans speak and write in a
number of English varieties without even thinking about doing so. Like
others, you generally speak differently with friends than you do with
elders. You usually use different types of language when texting on your
phone than when writing a professional email. As you make these
communication choices based on different settings and audiences, you
signal your identity and culture through word choice, sentence
structure, and use of language in specific situations. For example, when
speaking with friends, you may engage in wordplay to show identification
with the group. On the other hand, you may speak with respect to elders
to show an identity as a well-mannered younger relative, and you may use
a standard email format to show a professional identity. If you speak
other languages, you may find yourself freely switching between English
and those other languages when conversing with people who share the same
linguistic abilities; these shifts from one language to another showcase
your identity as a multilingual person. As author Gloria Anzaldúa
(1942--2004) writes in *Borderlands / La Frontera*, "I will no longer be
made to feel ashamed of existing. I will have my voice: Indian, Spanish,
white" (59).

Every time you communicate, you signal some aspect of your identity. In
the same way that everyone has multiple, intersecting identities,
everyone has multiple ways of expressing themselves through language. As
members of a multiethnic, multicultural society, everyone should
recognize and respect these personal ways of communicating, which are
integral to a shared human experience.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

# Expressing Identity in Writing {#sect-00003}

Even though individuals speak and write effectively using different
varieties of English, many people nevertheless believe that one
standard, "proper" English variety exists and that this "correct" way of
speaking and writing should be used universally in all settings. This
viewpoint considers varieties of English outside the imagined norm to be
"wrong," "bad," or "substandard." For example, speakers of some southern
U.S. English varieties are often judged as "poor" or "unintelligent."
Similarly, people who speak English with the accent of another language
may be incorrectly assumed to be illiterate. If you speak and write
using one of those undervalued English varieties, others may have judged
you for your language use or told you that your writing is "wrong." Even
without such judgment, you may have felt apprehensive when sharing your
writing with others; you may still fear a harsh assessment, or you may
feel vulnerable when others read your compositions.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

The truth is that people speak and write in different ways for different
rhetorical situation, or instances of communication. People in different
communities and professions employ distinct kinds of English. You
already use different varieties of English in different parts of your
life; as you progress through college and into your career, you will
learn the language expectations for the rhetorical situations you will
encounter in those spaces. In learning these expectations, you will gain
new identities. For example, you may become someone who knows how to
write an exemplary lab report, you could develop an identity as an
emerging researcher in any number of fields, or you may simply become
someone who is comfortable letting other people read your writing. These
new linguistic identities do not need to replace language use in other
areas of your life. For instance, you should not feel the need to use a
different form of grammar or punctuation in your social media posts. You
should feel comfortable using your familiar English varieties in
familiar rhetorical situations while, if needed, using new varieties of
English you may learn in the new rhetorical situations you encounter.
Additionally, you can and should seek out opportunities to use your
familiar, nonacademic English varieties in academic and professional
settings when you feel it is appropriate and aligns with the
expectations of your instructor or employer.

Because people write in many different settings for many reasons, no
particular English variety is appropriate for all writing tasks. As you
become more familiar with the different ways English is used in
different settings and communities, you can choose which variety to draw
on in each rhetorical situation. You also may choose whether to meet or
to disrupt the expectations of the people you are communicating with. In
making these choices, you will rely on your existing literacies as well
as newly learned ones.
