m00030

f6f570e7-d8c1-4f74-8b81-f62fadaa83a3

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Use reading for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and communicating.

Identify various types of literacy in the context of a literacy
narrative.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

"We are all more complicated than the role we are assigned in stories."
::::

# Being *Educated* {#sect-00002}

In her 2018 best seller, *Educated: A Memoir*, Tara Westover (b. 1986)
considers the effects of academic and nonacademic literacies in her
life. She also contemplates the ways in which identification with
certain literacies can both create and disturb an individual's
relationships and community memberships. While *Educated* addresses a
variety of themes, including the tensions that family members must
confront when they disagree, the memoir can be read largely as a
literacy narrative.

Early in her memoir, Westover discusses a range of literacies she
developed as the youngest of seven children in a homeschooled family.
Although she was taught to read, her literary world consisted almost
exclusively of the Book of Mormon and other religious texts. Her other
literacies included preserving food, preparing herbs, and caring for the
animals on the family farm, located on an Idaho mountain. She felt a
keen sense of belonging both to her family and to their mountain home.
Westover also learned how to work in and survive the dangerous junkyard
her family owned and operated. Even though many family members sustained
a variety of horrific accidents and injuries over the years, mostly at
the junkyard or in car accidents, the family relied entirely on natural
remedies; both parents considered doctors and medicine to be sinful.
Despite the range of literacies that Westover learned at home, her
parents did not value formal schooling and were indifferent to the
development of a broad understanding of science, history, or current
events. The Westover children were almost entirely self-directed in
their academic studies.

As a young child, Westover fully embraced her parents' beliefs that
"government schooling" was wholly unchristian and equivalent to
brainwashing. Her brother Tyler, however, had always loved "book
learning" and decided to leave home to attend college. He could not
fully articulate why he felt compelled to be the first to leave, and his
departure intrigued Westover. She, too, began to think about pursuing
higher education. After another brother became physically abusive toward
her, Tyler encouraged her to use college as an escape. She then bought
an ACT prep book, studied on her own, and did well enough on the exams
to be accepted to Brigham Young University.

Westover articulates in her memoir that once on campus, she realized how
her haphazard homeschooling experience had left her with large gaps in
knowledge and no preparation for studying and taking tests. As she
improved her academic skills, she also learned methods of academic
inquiry that were at odds with her parents' faith-based interpretations
of both world and personal events.

As Westover gained a science-based worldview through her college
experience, she struggled to integrate her new understandings with her
family's perspectives; in other words, her new literacies were at odds
with her old ones. She still felt connected to her family, but her new
understanding of the world was irreconcilable with her father's
survivalist, fundamentalist beliefs. When she refused to submit to her
father's will and return to his rigid worldview and interpretation of
Mormonism, Westover's relationship with most of her family members
disintegrated. Instead, she used her academic literacies to examine the
history of their religion in her doctoral research. All three Westover
children who left the mountain---and, to some extent, their
family---earned PhDs.

For Westover, the schism with her family was not primarily the result of
her literacy learning; rather, the relationship ruptured because she
refused to repudiate her newfound knowledge as inferior to her family's
ways of knowing. In subsequent interviews, Westover has discussed the
loss she felt in being cut off from her family and place of origin.
Although many college students experience similar challenges when
integrating new ways of encountering the world with their family's views
of "how things are" or "how things should be," some families feel
enriched by the new information, whereas others feel threatened by it.

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00003}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
