m00031

7c3e7b17-9dbc-4676-98a4-20a179edfb6e

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Read and compose in several genres to understand how genre conventions
shape and are shaped by readers' and writers' practices and purposes.

Match the capacities of different environments to varying rhetorical
situations.

Over time, people have developed specific ways of writing for particular
rhetorical situations. These distinctive ways of writing can be referred
to in part as genres. You may have heard the term *genre* in reference
to publishing categories, such as novels or memoirs, but the term can
refer to any type of writing that conforms to specific forms and
benchmarks. Many genres include stories of different kinds---for
example, folktales, short stories, accounts of events, and biographies.
As author Jonathan Gottschall says in his 2012 book of the same title,
humankind is "the storytelling animal"; people of all cultures have
engaged in telling stories, both as storytellers and as audience
members. Simply put, narrative stories are essential to many genres of
writing.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Exploring Narrative: Elements of Storytelling {#sect-00002}

Narratives, whether about literacy or anything else, include these key
elements:

Plot.

Authors of narratives tell about one or more events. In fiction, the
plot is the sequence of those events. In nonfiction, a plot is often
referred to simply as the events, but nonfiction texts follow similar
plot patterns, including exposition or introduction, a series of events
leading to a climax or discovery, and events following the climax or
discovery.

Characters.

The events in the story happen to characters, or individuals who are
part of the story. In nonfiction, these characters are usually real
people. The audience should feel a connection to the main character or
characters. Readers may like or dislike characters, blame them or feel
sorry for them, identify with them or not. Skilled writers portray
characters through the use of dialogue, actions or behavior, and
thoughts so that readers can understand what these individuals are like.

Setting.

Stories, fiction and nonfiction, take place in settings, which include
locations, time periods, and the cultures in which the characters or
real people are immersed.

Problem and Resolution.

In narratives, the characters generally encounter one or more problems.
The tension caused by the problem builds to a climax. The resolution of
the problem and the built-up tension usually occurs near the end of the
story.

Story Arc.

Most narratives have a story arc---a beginning, a middle, and an
end---but not necessarily in that order. The story arc, or order of
events, may occur chronologically, or the story may begin in the middle
of the action and explain earlier events later in the sequence.

# Specific Details and Other Conventions {#sect-00003}

To immerse the audience in the story, authors provide specific details
of the scenes and action. Many authors, and teachers, call this strategy
"showing, not telling." These aspects can include the following
elements:

Sensory Details:

Full, literal or figurative descriptions of the things that the
characters see, smell, hear, touch, and taste in their surroundings.

Dialogue:

Conversation between characters.

Action:

Vivid portrayal of the events in the story. Writers often use short
sentences and strong verbs to indicate physical or mental action.

Engaging Language:

Sentence structure and word choices, including

tone

(vocal attitude of the narrator or characters),

diction

(language used by the narrator or characters), and

varied constructions

(different kinds of sentences), that provide specific, clear, and
compelling information for the audience.

# Establishing the Significance {#sect-00004}

Most importantly, the audience must feel that the story has some
significance. While the author's main point may only be implied, rather
than stated outright as in a conventional academic essay, readers should
understand the point of the story and believe that it matters.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

For example, in the prologue to her memoir about the importance of
education for girls, *I Am Malala: The Girl Who Stood Up for Education
and Was Shot by the Taliban* (2013), Malala Yousafzai (b. 1997) writes,
"The day when everything changed was Tuesday, 9 October 2012." Yousafzai
provides reference to an exact date, the precise moment when a Taliban
gunman shot her in the head because she had spoken publicly in favor of
girls' right to education. Identifying the date in this way is a
technique that serves a variety of purposes. This technique provides a
focal point to draw the audience into the story, identifies details that
serve as rising action that the audience can assume will culminate on
this date, marks the setting in both time and place for the audience,
and ultimately foreshadows a climax of action for the reader. The
following elements, therefore, are crucial for writers of narratives to
consider when creating content for their writing.

Audience.

Narratives are designed to appeal to specific audiences; authors choose
storytelling elements, details, and language strategies to engage the
target audience.

Purpose.

Authors may tell stories for different reasons: to entertain, to
reinforce cultural norms, to educate, or to strengthen social ties. The
same story may, and often does, fulfill more than one purpose.
