m00036

297833a3-c567-4b1e-89e9-80dd236666da

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Use a variety of technologies to address a range of audiences.

Match the capacities of different environments to varying rhetorical
situations.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

An archive is a collection of artifacts, often historical, that serve to
document a time period, location, or group of people. Archives may be
located far from cities, accessible only in person, and they typically
house rare documents that visitors view or handle with particular care.
When an archive is digitized, however, visitors are allowed to view the
document in virtual spaces, thus creating an open and accessible
environment. The Digital Archive of Literacy Narratives (DALN) "is an
open public resource made up of stories from people just like you about
their experiences learning to read, write, and generally communicate
with the world around them." People who have diverse identities, lived
experiences, and engagement with literacies have uploaded their literacy
narratives and given permission for their stories to be read and shared
with public audiences.

# Using the Digital Archive of Literacy Narratives (DALN) {#sect-00002}

The DALN is completely keyword searchable, so if you are looking to read
literacy narratives on particular subjects---such as music or dance as
literacy, or any other concentrated subject about which one can
demonstrate knowledge---you can search for shared narratives with these
literacies. As the website states, "The DALN invites people of all ages,
races, communities, backgrounds, and interests to contribute stories
about how---and in what circumstances---they read, write, and compose
meaning, and how they learned to do so (or helped others learn)."
Sharing your literacy narrative in the DALN can be a rewarding way to
celebrate the completion of this writing milestone. The DALN welcomes
literacy narratives of all kinds and in all formats, including diaries,
blogs, poetry, music, videos, letters, stories, chat rooms, and so on.

# Publish Your Literacy Narrative {#sect-00003}

After you have completed and revised your literacy narrative, consider
sharing it with the [DALN](#) You may also want to consider reimagining
your literacy narrative in the form of a podcast or a TED Talk--type
video. The TED in TED Talks is an acronym that stands for the phrase
"Technology, Entertainment, and Design." [TED](#) is a nonprofit
organization devoted to the distribution of ideas; the website is
keyword searchable and provides an archive where you can find short
talks about just about any topic. The [criteria](#) for a TED Talk can
be found on the organization's website. To prepare for this publication
alternative, take an opportunity to watch the following sample TED Talks
that fit the genre of literacy narrative:

Luvvie Ajayi

discusses how blogging and creating a post that went viral led to her
identifying as a writer.

John Trischitti

talks about how reading literally saves lives and advocates for
providing young people with books to secure their futures.
