m00037

948d4159-5bd9-4f54-90f4-05e65ee198e9

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Reflect on the development of composing processes.

Consider how those processes affect your work.

Your instructor may require a portfolio as a part of the composition
course curriculum. A portfolio is a collection of your work, gathered in
a single place for the purpose of assessing your growth and achievement
as a writer. A portfolio allows you not only to include writing
artifacts but also to reflect on the process of composing those
artifacts. In this section, you will have an opportunity to compose a
reflection on the process of writing your literacy narrative.

# Reflection Prompt {#sect-00002}

One of the most valuable writing exercises is to reflect on work you
have completed or experiences you have had. Reflection supports learning
by allowing writers to articulate the impact that experiences have had
on various aspects of their lives. In responding to the ideas in this
section, take some time to reflect on your experiences, as well as the
experiences of others, with literacy and learning. Using the guidelines
your instructor provides, compose a reflection that responds to the
following questions:

How has your understanding of literacies been affected by the
opportunity to reflect on your engagement with literacy practices, the
practices of those in your composition course community, or the
practices of people beyond your immediate community?

How will this experience and reflection affect your future engagement
with various literacies?

# Literacy Narrative Revision {#sect-00003}

Submitting the best version of your work is an important part of
preparing a portfolio. After you have received a graded essay with
comments from your instructor, use those comments as a resource to
revise the essay for a final time. You will want to use this revised
essay for your portfolio submission.

# Further Reading {#sect-00004}

The digital and hard-copy texts and other materials listed below can
provide additional models and context for your work in reading and
writing in the literacy narrative genre.

Coates, Ta-Nehisi. "Ta-Nehisi Coates on Asking Questions That Have No
Answers." YouTube, uploaded by The Atlantic, 21 Feb. 2017,
www.youtube.com/watch?v=JIgpNuCy-eA.

*Digital Archive of Literacy Narratives*. The Ohio State U and Georgia
State U, www.thedaln.org/#/home.

Hernandez Castillo, Marcelo. *Children of the Land: A Memoir*. Harper,
2020.

Hurston, Zora Neale. *Dust Tracks on a Road: An Autobiography*. J. B.
Lippincott, 1942.

Lamott, Anne. "Shitty First Drafts." *Bird by Bird: Some Instructions on
Writing and Life*, Pantheon Books, 1994, pp. 21--27.

"Literacy." *UNESCO*, 8 Mar. 2021, en.unesco.org/themes/literacy.

Peterson, Amber. "Literacy Is More Than Just Reading and Writing."
*Literacy & NCTE*, National Council of Teachers of English, 23 Mar.
2020, ncte.org/blog/2020/03/literacy-just-reading-writing/.

Polacco, Patricia. *Thank You, Mr. Falker*. Philomel Books, 1998.

Rose, Mike. *Why School? Reclaiming Education for All of Us*. New Press,
2009.

# Works Cited {#sect-00005}

Anzaldúa, Gloria. *Borderlands / La Frontera: The New Mestiza*. Aunt
Lute Books, 1987.

Douglass, Frederick. *Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an
American Slave*. Anti-slavery Office, 1845.

"Frederick Douglass." *U.S. National Park Service*, 15 July 2020,
www.nps.gov/people/frederick-douglass.htm.

Gottschall, Jonathan. *The Storytelling Animal: How Stories Make Us
Human*. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2012.

Keller, Helen. *The Story of My Life*. 1903. *Project Gutenberg*, 4 Feb.
2013, www.gutenberg.org/files/2397/2397-h/2397-h.htm.

"Literacy." *UNESCO*, 8 Mar. 2021, en.unesco.org/themes/literacy.

"Rhode Island Union of Colored Women's Clubs." *League of Women Voters
of Rhode Island*, 12 May 2021,
my.lwv.org/rhode-island/centennial-suffrage-history/rhode-island-union-colored-women%E2%80%99s-clubs.

Westover, Tara. *Educated: A Memoir*. Random House, 2018.

Yousafzai, Malala. *I Am Malala: The Girl Who Stood Up for Education and
Was Shot by the Taliban*. Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2013.

# Works Consulted {#sect-00006}

Baker-Bell, April, et al. "This Ain't Another Statement! This Is a
DEMAND for Black Linguistic Justice!" *Conference on College Composition
and Communication*, National Council of Teachers of English, July 2020,
cccc.ncte.org/cccc/demand-for-black-linguistic-justice.

Banks, Adam J. "Oakland, the Word, and the Divide: How We All Missed the
Moment." *Race, Rhetoric, and Technology: Searching for Higher Ground*,
Lawrence Erlbaum, 2006, pp. 11--46.

Burke, Kenneth. *A Grammar of Motives*. Prentice-Hall, 1945.

"Definition of Literacy in a Digital Age." *National Council of Teachers
of English*, 7 Nov. 2019,
ncte.org/statement/nctes-definition-literacy-digital-age/.

Elbow, Peter. "Inviting the Mother Tongue: Beyond 'Mistakes,' 'Bad
English,' and 'Wrong Language.'" *JAC*, vol. 19, no. 3, 1999, pp.
359--388.

Horner, Bruce, et al. "Language Difference in Writing: Toward a
Translingual Approach." *College English*, vol. 73, no. 3, 2011, pp.
303--321.

"Paramedic Method: A Lesson in Writing Concisely." *OWL: The Purdue
Online Writing Lab*, Purdue U, 2021,
owl.purdue.edu/owl/general_writing/academic_writing/paramedic_method.html.

Royster, Jacqueline Jones. "When the First Voice You Hear Is Not Your
Own." *College Composition and Communication*, vol. 47, no. 1, 1996, pp.
29--40.

"Students' Right to Their Own Language." 1974. *Conference on College
Composition and Communication*, National Council of Teachers of English,
prod-ncte-cdn.azureedge.net/nctefiles/groups/cccc/newsrtol.pdf.

Williams, Joseph M., and Joseph Bizup. *Style: The Basics of Clarity and
Grace*. 5th ed., Pearson, 2015.
