m00091

d2769296-e0cd-401f-b14e-e86f24db7b2a

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify key rhetorical strategies that authors use to persuade readers.

Analyze texts to demonstrate understanding of key rhetorical concepts.

Identify genre conventions and explain how they are shaped by purpose,
culture, and expectation.

Rhetorical analysis is the genre, or type of writing, that examines the
way writers and speakers use language to influence readers. Rather than
describing or summarizing content---the *what* of characters or
themes---rhetorical analysis focuses on the individual parts of a text
to show *how* language works to create the effects the writer wants. In
other words, in addition to content, writers use rhetorical strategies
to deliver and strengthen their ideas and thus influence their readers.
A rhetorical analysis should, therefore, address the rhetorical
situation, or conditions of communication that surround the rhetoric.
These consist of the author (who), message (what), readers (to whom),
purpose (why), means (how), context (where and when), and culture
(community).

*Culture* refers to the way of life that a defined group of people
establish. Their beliefs, laws, customs, and habits represent them as a
group and may provide a signature to identify who they are and what they
have accomplished. Rhetorical analysis must take these factors into full
consideration, especially because cultural patterns are constantly
changing and evolving with new knowledge and behaviors. Moreover,
culture will vary greatly from group to group. Subgroups within a larger
culture---for example, minorities within a majority population---may
have distinct expressions of culture. When rhetorical analysis
approaches language of a particular culture, questions may arise about
who is best equipped to do the analysis and on what criteria, based on
time and place.

Writers of rhetorical analyses consider these elements carefully and ask
questions based on them. *What are the goals of the author of the text?
What factors are at play in the author's choice of strategies used to
make a rhetorical impact? What may occur in the interaction between the
writer and reader? Will readers approach the piece neutrally, with no
previous opinions? Are they likely to agree because they are of the same
opinion, or are they hostile and ready to reject the arguments? Have
they heard or read the ideas before? Will the ideas be too radical or
too familiar? Are readers likely to see the author as sharing the field
with them or as a stranger who must win their confidence?*

# The Workings of Rhetorical Analysis {#sect-00002}

The aim of rhetorical analysis is not to find agreement with or praise
for the writer, although either may be implied or stated. The essential
task of analyzing requires a detachment that will convince the readers
of the *validity* and *effectiveness* (or lack thereof) of the writing
by identifying the writer's tools and what they accomplish.

As you formulate your rhetorical analysis, be aware of the following
approaches and strategies that writers use to persuade an audience. Your
goal will be to identify them in your analysis, explain their use, and
evaluate their effectiveness.

Establishing credibility.

Writers include their credentials or experience with the subject to
ensure that readers will take them seriously as someone who knows what
they're talking about. To reinforce their authority, they cite reliable
sources as support for their points.

Sharing personal experience.

Sharing a personal experience related to the subject enhances
credibility and may also appeal to readers' emotions.

Targeting emotional concerns.

By specifically addressing those incidents or outcomes that readers may
fear or desire, the author can rally them to take a particular position.
Emotional concerns also include appeals to the five senses and to
broader sentiments such as love, loyalty, anger, justice, or patriotism.

Using devices that draw attention to claims.

These include literary devices such as parallelism, repetition, and
rhetorical questions that writers and speakers use to emphasize points
and unify a text.

Supporting claims with convincing evidence.

Ways of supporting claims include quoting, summarizing, or paraphrasing
expert opinions; relating anecdotes and examples; and citing appropriate
statistics and facts.

Acknowledging the opposition.

If a writer makes a point of explaining other groups' positions
carefully and respectfully, readers from those groups, as well as the
target audience, are more likely to be responsive to the writer. By
acknowledging the opposition, writers show they have considered opposing
views and can then demonstrate that their position is preferable.

Questioning the motivation of the opposition.

By exposing others' possibly conflicting interests, the writer can
undermine the credibility of an opponent's character or argument.

In addition to these, writers may use more questionable rhetorical
devices to persuade readers. While the techniques of each strategy
differ, all lead away from the actual argument and seek to persuade
through means other than reasonable, logical thought. Such strategies
include bandwagon, ad hominem (name-calling), bait and switch, and more.
Recall the roommates' use of some of these in their efforts at
persuasion in [Breaking the Whole into Its Parts](#).

# Rhetorical Strategies in Advertising and Public Policy {#sect-00003}

The strategies and other devices of rhetorical writing that are open to
analysis are present in many types of communication, including
multimodal examples such as advertisements that combine visuals with
carefully crafted texts, dialogue, and voice-over.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Look at the M&Ms commercial, for example, in [this collection](#) of
Super Bowl ads. Starting at minute 4:57, the prize-winning ad for M&Ms
initially shows the widely recognizable candy in its multiple colors as
both speaking cartoon figures and symbols of human behavior. The simple
pitch: when people have offended others in one of a range of
interpersonal blunders, the candy is offered as a peace offering. For
example, the first image shows a man on a plane bumping into another
passenger's seat, causing him to spill his drink. The offender then
offers the passenger a package of M&Ms. What is the rhetorical strategy
behind the situation and the gesture? The ad appeals to pathos in the
sense that people feel the need to be liked. Despite the humorous twist
in the comment that he kicked the seat on purpose, the offending man
nonetheless doesn't want to be disliked. Nor do the others who commit
other blunders. The sense of taste---sweetness---also comes into play,
appealing to the senses, as does the sense of sight in the images of the
colorful candy.

Furthermore, placing the ad during the Super Bowl targets an audience of
game watchers whose ages, interests, and habits have been studied. They
may be in a snacking frame of mind, so the appeal of candy is timely
(kairos). The ad combines sophistication, appropriate adult behavior,
and childishly amusing animation and personification. Seeing the product
makes it more memorable. On the other hand, note the subtle use of the
bandwagon fallacy: different people in different situations are doing
the same thing---offering M&Ms. The bandwagon implication is that if you
do something you're sorry for or should be sorry for (or even if you
don't), giving out M&Ms is the way to apologize and be likable. Because
travelers, businesspeople, the religiously observant, and others from
different walks of life are doing it, so should you.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

[\#](#) is an image from the U.S. Forest Service that also reflects the
use of rhetorical strategies. Smokey Bear is a symbol created in 1944 to
raise awareness of the danger of forest fires. Images of this gentle,
personified bear are often accompanied by the slogan "Remember . . .
only you can prevent forest fires" or a variation of it. The image shows
Smokey dressed in rolled-up jeans, a name belt, and a ranger's hat. He
is reading letters delivered by a mail truck and sent to his own ZIP
code, 20252, from children and adults promising to cooperate with his
environmental efforts. The entire image is among the most recognizable
of American cultural symbols.

The continuing identification of the bear and his appeal over decades is
an example of the powerful use of rhetorical devices that speak without
seeming to become dated and lose impact. First, a wild and dangerous
animal is personified and made credible so that the credibility (ethos)
of Smokey as a domesticated father figure with a fuzzy, playful cub
climbing on the family mailbox removes any sense of danger and instead
makes him into a believable voice for safety. No humans are emphasized
in the illustration; the mail truck is seen only in the distance after
having delivered another stack of fan mail. Other small animals are
present in the background, as are familiar household items such as a
shovel, a mailbox, an American flag, a boat on crystal clear water, and
the playful images of the ranger's hat and rolled-up jeans on crossed
legs. The drawing features bright primary colors and the dark forest
green of bountiful nature. The print medium in the center of the
illustration, the sign reading "Prevent forest fires," unifies the
visual.

Because the images are emotionally accessible to children as well as
adults, they appeal to widely shared pathos. The unspoken implication is
that preventing forest fires will allow these young animals and forest
plants to live rather than die in a carelessly started---and
deadly---fire. In addition, it will allow human life to continue safely
and pleasurably, as viewers can see, far in the background, people
sailing and enjoying the water. If children's wisdom and receptivity to
images are present, this idealized picture has great appeal. Rather than
a harsh rebuke for adult negligence, the lesson of Smokey relies on the
power of rhetoric to modify behavior with specific, carefully crafted
appeals. Yet the most frequently used slogan, "Only you can prevent
forest fires," is an example of hyperbole. Certainly "you" are not the
sole person responsible for starting or preventing fires. Other people
and other factors are at work aside from yourself.

More explicit, however, is this earlier image:

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

The rhetorical strategy again is pathos, appealing to a sense of guilt.
If these children can help prevent fires, then surely adults can do the
same, as they are likely more knowledgeable and care for the safety and
health of their children.

# Rhetorical Analysis: Key Terms {#sect-00004}

## Rhetorical Appeals {#sect-00005}

When doing a rhetorical analysis, notice these appeals writers use to
persuade their audiences.

Ethos

:

believable, authoritative voice that elicits credibility and audience
trust.

Kairos

:

sense of appropriate timing when attempting to persuade.

Logos

:

credible information---facts, reasons, or examples---presented as
evidence that moves toward a sensible and acceptable conclusion.

Pathos

:

the use of appeals to feelings and emotions shared by an audience. Some
of the general categories are fear, guilt, anger, love, loyalty,
patriotism, and duty.

## Rhetorical Devices and Language Use {#sect-00006}

When doing a rhetorical analysis, notice these devices writers use to
organize and emphasize their writing.

Figurative language

:

similes and metaphors. Comparing one aspect of things that in other ways
are completely different is an essential part of rhetorical language.
Simile example: "The treasure chest of nature's wonders shone like a
pirate's gold tooth." Metaphor example: "The pizza was a disk of saucy
sunlight."

Numerical data

:

statistics and figures. When accurate, numerical data can strengthen an
argument.

Parallel structure

:

repetition of the same pattern of words to show that ideas are equally
significant. Parallel structure, or parallelism, calls attention to
these ideas, achieves balance, and makes the statements more memorable.
Example: "Ask not what your country can do for you but what you can do
for your country."

Personification

:

giving an inanimate or nonhuman object human characteristics to make it
seem alive and relatable. Examples: "The virus packed its bags and
spread across the ocean"; "Twitter erupted in outrage."

Repetition

:

repeating a single word or group of words to build emphasis. Example:
"The first

cause

is poverty; the second

cause

is poor health; the third

cause

is discrimination. These

causes

have been studied, but to what effect?"

Rhetorical question

:

a question that is not expected to be answered, one for which there is
no answer, or one that creates a dramatic effect. Examples: "Has it
occurred to you to ask why the economy is so unstable? A first point to
consider is . . ."; "Do you think poverty will go away by itself?"

Understatement

:

presenting something as less important than it is as a way of distancing
from the truth. Understatement is often used sarcastically or
ironically. Example: "It may not have occurred to politicians that
poverty leads to a host of health-related issues."

## Rhetorical Fallacies {#sect-00007}

When doing a rhetorical analysis, notice these fallacies writers may use
to unethically persuade their audiences.

Ad hominem

:

logical fallacy that attempts to discredit a person, not an argument.

Ad hominem

, meaning "against the man," is often termed

name-calling

. Examples: "She's just a leftover from another era who can't accept
change"; "He's a stupid bully and an outright thief."

Bait and switch

:

logical fallacy that introduces a point about one thing that is likely
to be accepted and then changes the terms once initial agreement occurs.
Example: "Buy these phones at this price before they're all gone!" When
you go to buy one, moments later, the phones are gone---and they're far
more expensive.

Bandwagon

:

logical fallacy often used in advertising and propaganda. It tries to
make people do something or think a certain way because everyone is
doing it, and if they don't go along, they will be excluded. Example:
"Everyone is buying these sneakers; get yours now before you're left
out." Negative example: "This style is so dated; no one wears things
like this now."

Causal fallacy

:

the faulty logic of claiming or believing that an event that follows
another event is the result of it. For example, losing your keys after
going to a concert does not mean the events are connected causally;
going to the concert did not cause you to lose your keys.

Hyperbole

:

exaggeration. Hyperbole is one of the staples of advertising language.
Examples: "Season's Best Peppermint Glazed Delights"; "I have a ton of
homework."
