m00092

61da0ef9-cc9e-4c69-a5b4-b9f6b470b6f9

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify the ways a student writer has analyzed the rhetorical
strategies in a persuasive text.

Demonstrate critical thinking and problem-solving when reading a
rhetorical analysis.

# Introduction {#sect-00002}

Matthew Desmond (b. 1979 or 1980) is a sociology professor at Princeton
University. He has published four books, each addressing issues of
poverty or racial inequality in American life. He has been recognized by
the Politico 50 list as an important contributing voice to national
political debate. In the analysis that follows, student Eliana Evans
examines Desmond's work from a rhetorical perspective.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

# Story as Persuasion {#sect-00003}

Imagine it's Friday---payday. One American worker picks up her check for
\$637. Now, imagine that \$550 will go toward rent, leaving only a small
amount for everything else. The remaining \$87 must be divided among
food, utilities, childcare, and medical treatment. Unfortunately, many
of the nation's poor don't have to imagine this troubling scenario
because this is their reality. In his book *Evicted: Poverty and Profit
in the American City*, ethnographer and author Matthew Desmond follows
eight poor families in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, as they struggle to
establish and maintain one of humanity's most basic needs: housing. As
an ethnographer, Desmond gathers research to promote the study and
documentation of human culture: how people live under all kinds of
conditions.

Ethos. *By mentioning Desmond's qualifications as an ethnographer,
Eliana Evans appeals to ethos: Desmond is an authority whose opinions
can be taken seriously.*

Introductory Anecdote. *By beginning with a real-life example and
addressing the reader directly, the writer immediately emphasizes
Desmond's hard-hitting point. This strategy engages readers from the
start.*

Living and working in the typical mid-size American city of Milwaukee in
the early 2000s, Desmond highlights the source of the cyclical poverty
he observes around him. He concludes that unstable housing is "deeply .
. . implicated in the creation of poverty" (5).

Thesis Statement. *The writer notes that Desmond offers his thesis
statement, or the main point of his argument, without delay, building
off the specific example in the introduction.*

Throughout his book, Desmond explains that inflated rents and
evictions--- the forced loss of housing---create power imbalances
between landlords and tenants. Legal and economic systems rigged against
the poor are to blame for creating an unbreakable cycle of poverty for
renters. To advance his deductive argument, Desmond largely employs
emotional anecdotal evidence, introducing readers to the real-life
circumstances of eight families, thus using pathos to reach his readers.
To reinforce this anecdotal evidence, he also employs logical
statistical evidence as well as emotional allusions to the nation's
founding principle of equality.

To bring his book to life, Desmond uses many quotations from the people
he portrays in the cycle of poverty. Early in the book, he describes the
life of Sherrena Tarver, an entrepreneur landlord who owns and manages
numerous properties and has to evict nonpaying tenants in the most
difficult circumstance. At one point, she faces a tough decision about
Lamar, a legless man who occupies an apartment where he helps
neighborhood boys stay in school and control their lives. He simply
cannot meet his financial responsibilities, and Sherrena is torn between
helping him and protecting her own bottom line. "I guess I got to stop
feeling sorry for these people because nobody is feeling sorry for me,"
she states (11). She will have to pay her own mortgage on the property.
No connection exists if others do not feel sorry for Sherrena, who has
to face her own inner conflict about Lamar.

Ethos, Pathos, and Logos. *Desmond speaks with authority as someone who
cares deeply about the injustices of the housing situation. Evans notes
that Desmond also relies on emotional and logical thought and examples,
and she shows this in his quotations.*

Although his book identifies unstable housing as a cause of poverty,
Desmond writes for the purpose of creating empathy in voters and
establishing facts that policy makers cannot ignore to remedy the
housing trap. The moving description of eviction and its effects allows
readers to fully appreciate his proposed solutions. As a main point,
Desmond advocates for legislation that would establish a universal
housing voucher program combined with government regulation to stabilize
rents. He explains that voucher "programs lift roughly 2.8 million
people out of poverty" each year (302). If these programs were expanded
and supported by laws that would prevent landlords from establishing
exploitative rents, many more people could be helped. Desmond hopes to
convince voters who have been moved by his ethnographic discussion to
elect candidates who are serious about ending poverty and creating a
more equal America.

Language Use. *Evans uses the phrase "as a main point" to emphasize to
readers that Desmond strongly believes in the voucher system.*

In support of his argument, Desmond presents multiple anecdotal examples
to illustrate the root of the cyclical poverty his subjects face. For
example, in Chapter 16, Kamala, a middle-aged mother of three, leaves
her children for one evening in the care of Devon, their father. Later,
a fire caused by a lamp kills their eight-month-old daughter. The
apartment is uninhabitable, but the landlord, Sherrena, keeps the
month's rent. The police report that the three children, abandoned by
Devon, were alone in the apartment. The high cost of monthly rent leaves
Kamala with few options for proper childcare, and without childcare, she
has few options for employment. The exploitation by landlords such as
Sherrena only intensifies the tenant's poverty. Kamala, who still has
two children to support, is left with no home, no money, and little
means of survival. Her story, and the stories of the many others Desmond
chronicles, supports the argument that unstable housing is a cause of
poverty, not a condition.

Examples and Pathos. *Desmond's discussion gains emotional strength from
the story of a child's needless death.*

Pathos and Logos. *The logic of the situation is that a family must
endure hardship with little support. The overwhelming need and the trap
of poverty in poor housing make for strong logical and emotional
persuasion.*

Desmond relays the stories of Kamala and others to generate empathy with
readers. These stories create emotional appeal in that they allow
readers to experience the spiraling effects of poverty along with people
they come to care about. Indeed, Desmond relies on the intensity of
Kamala's story to give poverty a face. Kamala is no longer a nameless,
faceless statistic. She is a real woman who experiences the loss of a
child as a result of circumstances beyond her control. Kamala's story
helps break the preconception that poor people are lazy and make
individual choices to perpetuate their own poverty. Her situation
illustrates a cycle of unbreakable tragedy and poverty that begins with
her inability to secure affordable and stable housing. The details of
her story make it hard for the public to ignore.

Desmond does not rely on anecdotal evidence alone. He also includes
statistical evidence to support his argument.

Logical Evidence. *The writer notes Desmond's use of quantitative
evidence---an appeal to logic. Readers are eager to learn facts that
will strengthen the impact of Desmond's argument.*

In the prologue, Desmond explains that Arleen pays "88 percent of
\[her\] \$628-a-month welfare check" in rent (3). This disproportionate
sum creates a situation in which "1 in 8 poor renting families
nationwide \[are\] unable to pay all of their rent" (5). In Milwaukee,
"landlords evict roughly 16,000 adults and children each year" (4). Such
numbers go beyond empathy and instead appeal to logic. Policy makers are
likely to reject the idea of drafting laws to relieve poverty based on
feelings or empathy. Statistics, however, provide hard numbers that are
not subject to debate and that reinforce the need for logical and
realistic solutions. Desmond also notes that eviction and its effects
have been vastly ignored by sociologists. These statistics fight
preconceptions such as *Why don't poor people just get jobs?* In
addition, by using personification, Desmond explains that poverty is a
formidable enemy that a minimum-wage job cannot defeat.

Logos. *As a skilled writer, Desmond knows that if political action is
called for, he will have to present a heavy dose of facts and numbers.
Evans notes that readers are more likely to be persuaded by a
combination of different rhetorical strategies, such as pathos and
logos.*

Personification. *Evans notes that Desmond uses figurative language to
personify the idea of poverty, calling it "a formidable enemy."*

Finally, Desmond appeals to his readers' sense of right and wrong when
he asks a key rhetorical question: Is housing a fundamental American
right? If readers answer "yes," then it is un-American to systematically
lock poor people away from the founding ideals of the country through
housing, banking, and legal systems that work to guarantee their
poverty. The American dream is one of equal opportunity. Yet, despite
the constitutional guarantee of civil rights, the poor people who
struggle to maintain housing in Desmond's Milwaukee are further
separated from the American dream by race.

For example, in Chapter 3, Desmond describes the segregation that has
long plagued Milwaukee: despite the "open housing measure" guaranteed by
"the 1968 Civil Rights Act," Milwaukee "remain\[s\] one of the most
racially divided cities in the nation" (34). The housing divide in
Milwaukee not only keeps poor people from achieving the American dream
of stable and affordable housing, but it also supports a system of
segregation that goes against the founding ideal of equality.

Logos and Pathos. *Desmond addresses the issue of right vs. wrong. He
attempts to persuade readers by offering examples that make them think
about the legal aspects of housing (logos) and the effects that
deprivation have on individuals (pathos)*.

Desmond's argument is enticing in many ways. However, critics point out
that he proposes a solution that fixes only the short-term problem of
sustaining stable housing with a universal voucher program that provides
no incentive for work. The long-term problem, which Desmond never
addresses, would have to include a solution that would raise a massive
number of people out of poverty by enabling them to sustain reliable
housing, along with other living expenses, without relying heavily on
government assistance. Vouchers may begin to eat away at the root of
poverty, but they are a short-term, rather than a long-term, fix.

Addressing Counterclaims. *Evans is careful to include some possibly
negative views of Desmond's main points to indicate that she has
considered all sides before reaching a final verdict on the validity of
his argument*.

In the end, though, Desmond's argument is effective because he provides
ample evidence with varying appeals to support his claims. The use of
anecdotes allows readers to feel the pain of poverty. Desmond's
statistical research shows logical reasons to end poverty through
universal housing. The mentions of founding principles such as equality
show that readers have a moral obligation as Americans to participate in
a solution to the housing crisis.

Although much of Desmond's book relies on its anecdotal evidence and
emotional appeal, it is his logic that ultimately proves convincing. He
identifies a tangible cause of poverty, then offers an equally tangible
solution to the problem he describes. If having stable and affordable
housing will help end poverty and thus improve society, then the
government should provide this through vouchers and rent regulation.

Conclusion and Thesis Statement Reaffirmed. *Evans praises Desmond for
his rhetorical ability to appeal to readers in different ways. She
claims that his logical approach, presenting facts and figures along
with emotional appeals, should be enough to convince the government to
act.*

## Work Cited {#sect-00004}

Desmond, Matthew. *Evicted: Poverty and Profit in the American City.*
Broadway Books, 2016.

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00005}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
