m00093

eaf5a88e-dd93-46b6-ba7f-dc2a303d05b9

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Develop a rhetorical analysis through multiple drafts.

Identify and analyze rhetorical strategies in a rhetorical analysis.

Demonstrate flexible strategies for generating ideas, drafting,
reviewing, collaborating, revising, rewriting, and editing.

Give and act on productive feedback for works in progress.

The ability to think critically about rhetoric is a skill you will use
in many of your classes, in your work, and in your life to gain insight
from the way a text is written and organized. You will often be asked to
explain or to express an opinion about what someone else has
communicated and how that person has done so, especially if you take an
active interest in politics and government. Like Eliana Evans in the
previous section, you will develop similar analyses of written works to
help others understand *how* a writer or speaker may be trying to reach
them.

# Summary of Assignment: Rhetorical Analysis {#sect-00002}

The assignment is to write a rhetorical analysis of a piece of
persuasive writing. It can be an editorial, a movie or book review, an
essay, a chapter in a book, or a letter to the editor. For your
rhetorical analysis, you will need to consider the rhetorical
situation---subject, author, purpose, context, audience, and
culture---and the strategies the author uses in creating the argument.
Back up all your claims with evidence from the text. In preparing your
analysis, consider these questions:

What is the subject? Be sure to distinguish what the piece is about.

Who is the writer, and what do you know about them? Be sure you know
whether the writer is considered objective or has a particular agenda.

Who are the readers? What do you know or what can you find out about
them as the particular audience to be addressed at this moment?

What is the purpose or aim of this work? What does the author hope to
achieve?

What are the time/space/place considerations and influences of the
writer? What can you know about the writer and the full context in which
they are writing?

What specific techniques has the writer used to make their points? Are
these techniques successful, unsuccessful, or questionable?

For this assignment, read the following opinion piece by Octavio
Peterson, printed in his local newspaper. You may choose it as the text
you will analyze, continuing the analysis on your own, or you may refer
to it as a sample as you work on another text of your choosing. Your
instructor may suggest presidential or other political speeches, which
make good subjects for rhetorical analysis.

When you have read the piece by Peterson advocating for the need to
continue teaching foreign languages in schools, reflect carefully on the
impact the letter has had on you. You are not expected to agree or
disagree with it. Instead, focus on the rhetoric---the way Peterson uses
language to make his point and convince you of the validity of his
argument.

Another Lens. Consider presenting your rhetorical analysis in a
multimodal format. Use a blogging site or platform such as WordPress or
Tumblr to explore the blogging genre, which includes video clips,
images, hyperlinks, and other media to further your discussion. Because
this genre is less formal than written text, your tone can be
conversational. However, you still will be required to provide the same
kind of analysis that you would in a traditional essay. The same
materials will be at your disposal for making appeals to persuade your
readers. Rhetorical analysis in a blog may be a new forum for the
exchange of ideas that retains the basics of more formal communication.
When you have completed your work, share it with a small group or the
rest of the class. See [Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative
Interaction between Text and Image](#) for more about creating a
multimodal composition.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Start with a Thesis Statement {#sect-00004}

After you have read this opinion piece, or another of your choice,
several times and have a clear understanding of it as a piece of
rhetoric, consider whether the writer has succeeded in being persuasive.
You might find that in some ways they have and in others they have not.
Then, with a clear understanding of your purpose---to analyze how the
writer seeks to persuade---you can start framing a thesis statement: a
declarative sentence that states the topic, the angle you are taking,
and the aspects of the topic the rest of the paper will support.

Complete the following sentence frames as you prepare to start:

The subject of my rhetorical analysis is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

My goal is to \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, not necessarily to \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The writer's main point is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

I believe the writer has succeeded (or not) because \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

I believe the writer has succeeded in \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (name the part or
parts) but not in \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (name the part or parts).

The writer's strongest (or weakest) point is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, which
they present by \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

# Text Evidence and Analysis of Effect {#sect-00005}

As you begin to draft your rhetorical analysis, remember that you are
giving your opinion on the author's use of language. For example,
Peterson has made a decision about the teaching of foreign languages,
something readers of the newspaper might have different views on. In
other words, there is room for debate and persuasion.

The context of the situation in which Peterson finds himself may well be
more complex than he discusses. In the same way, the context of the
piece you choose to analyze may also be more complex. For example,
perhaps Greendale is facing an economic crisis and *must* pare its
budget for educational spending and public works. It's also possible
that elected officials have made budget cuts for education a part of
their platform or that school buildings have been found obsolete for
safety measures. On the other hand, maybe a foreign company will come to
town only if more Spanish speakers can be found locally. These factors
would play a part in a real situation, and rhetoric would reflect that.
If applicable, consider such possibilities regarding the subject of your
analysis. Here, however, these factors are unknown and thus do not enter
into the analysis.

## Introduction {#sect-00006}

One effective way to begin a rhetorical analysis is by using an
anecdote, as Eliana Evans has done. For a rhetorical analysis of the
opinion piece, a writer might consider an anecdote about a person who
was in a situation in which knowing another language was important or
not important. If they begin with an anecdote, the next part of the
introduction should contain the following information:

Author's name and position, or other qualification to establish ethos

Title of work and genre

Author's thesis statement or stance taken ("Peterson argues that . . .")

Brief introductory explanation of how the author develops and supports
the thesis or stance

If relevant, a brief summary of context and culture

Once the context and situation for the analysis are clear, move directly
to your thesis statement. In this case, your thesis statement will be
your opinion of how successful the author has been in achieving the
established goal through the use of rhetorical strategies. Read the
sentences in [\#](#), and decide which would make the best thesis
statement. Explain your reasoning in the right-hand column of this or a
similar chart.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  *Sentence*                          *Why or Why Not?*
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  Only 50 percent of the students     
  have said they want to study        
  Spanish or any other language, so   
  statistics show a lack of interest  
  in spite of Octavio Peterson's      
  rhetorical claims.                  

  A public vote should be taken to    
  see how many residents support      
  Octavio Peterson's rhetoric and     
  ideas on language and whether his   
  divisive opinion can be considered  
  as it stands.                       

  Because Octavio Peterson's ideas on 
  foreign language teaching are       
  definitely worthy of support, I     
  will summarize his letter and show  
  why he is correct.                  

  This analysis of Peterson's         
  language shows how he uses          
  rhetorical strategies to persuade   
  readers to consider the future of   
  language learning in the city's     
  schools.                            
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  : Thesis statement choices {#table-00001}

The introductory paragraph or paragraphs should serve to move the reader
into the body of the analysis and signal what will follow.

## Body {#sect-00007}

Your next step is to start supporting your thesis statement---that is,
how Octavio Peterson, or the writer of your choice, does or does not
succeed in persuading readers. To accomplish this purpose, you need to
look closely at the rhetorical strategies the writer uses.

First, list the rhetorical strategies you notice while reading the text,
and note where they appear. Keep in mind that you do not need to include
every strategy the text contains, only those essential ones that
emphasize or support the central argument and those that may seem
fallacious. You may add other strategies as well. The first example in
[\#](#) has been filled in.

  *Rhetorical Device/Strategy*        *Paragraph(s) Location*   *Effect on Argument*
  ----------------------------------- ------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Ethos, credibility                  First, second, fourth     By referring to himself, his education, his job, and his community involvement as a parent and concerned resident and by saying he has researched the subject, the writer establishes credibility.
  Pathos, emotion                                               
  Logos, reason                                                 
  Kairos, timeliness                                            
  Repetition                                                    
  Figurative language                                           
  Speaking familiarly or "folksily"                             
  Rhetorical question                                           
  Parallel structure                                            
  Addressing counterclaims                                      
  Bandwagon                                                     
  Ad hominem (name-calling)                                     
  Hyperbole (exaggeration)                                      
  Causal fallacy                                                

  : Rhetorical strategies {#table-00002}

When you have completed your list, consider how to structure your
analysis. You will have to decide which of the writer's statements are
most effective. The strongest point would be a good place to begin;
conversely, you could begin with the writer's weakest point if that
suits your purposes better. The most obvious organizational structure is
one of the following:

Go through the composition paragraph by paragraph and analyze its
rhetorical content, focusing on the strategies that support the writer's
thesis statement.

Address key rhetorical strategies individually, and show how the author
has used them.

As you read the next few paragraphs, consult [\#](#) for a visual plan
of your rhetorical analysis. Your first body paragraph is the first of
the analytical paragraphs. Here, too, you have options for organizing.
You might begin by stating the writer's strongest point. For example,
you could emphasize that Peterson appeals to ethos by speaking
personally to readers as fellow citizens and providing his credentials
to establish credibility as someone trustworthy with their interests at
heart.

Following this point, your next one can focus, for instance, on
Peterson's view that cutting foreign language instruction is a danger to
the education of Greendale's children. The points that follow support
this argument, and you can track his rhetoric as he does so.

You may then use the second or third body paragraph, connected by a
transition, to discuss Peterson's appeal to logos. One possible
transition might read, "To back up his assertion that omitting foreign
languages is detrimental to education, Peterson provides examples and
statistics." Locate examples and quotes from the text as needed. You can
discuss how, in citing these statistics, Peterson uses logos as a key
rhetorical strategy.

In another paragraph, focus on other rhetorical elements, such as
parallelism, repetition, and rhetorical questions. Moreover, be sure to
indicate whether the writer acknowledges counterclaims and whether they
are accepted or ultimately rejected.

The question of other factors at work in Greendale regarding finances,
or similar factors in another setting, may be useful to mention here if
they exist. As you continue, however, keep returning to your list of
rhetorical strategies and explaining them. Even if some appear less
important, they should be noted to show that you recognize how the
writer is using language. You will likely have a minimum of four body
paragraphs, but you may well have six or seven or even more, depending
on the work you are analyzing.

In your final body paragraph, you might discuss the argument that
Peterson, for example, has made by appealing to readers' emotions. His
calls for solidarity at the end of the letter provide a possible
solution to his concern that the foreign language curriculum "might
vanish like a puff of smoke."

Use [\#](#) to organize your rhetorical analysis. Be sure that each
paragraph has a topic sentence and that you use transitions to flow
smoothly from one idea to the next.

+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| *Body paragraph 1*               | Write a topic sentence           |
|                                  | explaining your first point of   |
|                                  | analysis. If you begin with what |
|                                  | you think is the writer's        |
|                                  | strongest point, state what it   |
|                                  | is and explain the rhetorical    |
|                                  | strategies used to support it.   |
|                                  | Provide appropriate quotations   |
|                                  | from the text.                   |
|                                  |                                  |
|                                  | Suggestion: Address ethos,       |
|                                  | pathos, and logos first. You may |
|                                  | need more than one paragraph to  |
|                                  | cover them.                      |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| *Body paragraph 2*               | If needed, continue your         |
|                                  | discussion of ethos, pathos,     |
|                                  | and/or logos, explaining how     |
|                                  | they function in the text and    |
|                                  | providing examples. Once you     |
|                                  | have completed your discussion,  |
|                                  | move on to your next point,      |
|                                  | which will address one or more   |
|                                  | specific strategies used.        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| *Body paragraph 3*               | Following a transition, write a  |
|                                  | topic sentence to address        |
|                                  | another point or points in the   |
|                                  | text. Discuss the strategies     |
|                                  | used, provide examples and       |
|                                  | quotations as appropriate, and   |
|                                  | show how they support (or don't  |
|                                  | support) the writer's thesis     |
|                                  | statement. Consider rhetorical   |
|                                  | strategies such as parallelism,  |
|                                  | repetition, rhetorical           |
|                                  | questions, and figurative        |
|                                  | language.                        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| *Body paragraphs 4--6 (or more   | Continue as needed. In this      |
| if needed)*                      | paragraph, you might point out   |
|                                  | rhetorical fallacies, such as    |
|                                  | bandwagon, ad hominem, or any    |
|                                  | others you notice, if you have   |
|                                  | not yet done so. Indicate how    |
|                                  | they strengthen or weaken the    |
|                                  | writer's position. If you have   |
|                                  | already addressed all the        |
|                                  | elements of your analysis,       |
|                                  | discuss the writer's approach to |
|                                  | counterclaims. You may need more |
|                                  | than four body paragraphs for    |
|                                  | your rhetorical analysis.        |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

: Drafting organizer {#table-00003}

## Conclusion {#sect-00008}

As you conclude your essay, your own logic in discussing the writer's
argument will make it clear whether you have found their claims
convincing. Your opinion, as framed in your conclusion, may restate your
thesis statement in different words, or you may choose to reveal your
thesis at this point. The real function of the conclusion is to confirm
your evaluation and show that you understand the use of the language and
the effectiveness of the argument.

In your analysis, note that objections could be raised because Peterson,
for example, speaks only for himself. You may speculate about whether
the next edition of the newspaper will feature an opposing opinion piece
from someone who disagrees. However, it is not necessary to provide
answers to questions you raise here. Your conclusion should summarize
briefly how the writer has made, or failed to make, a forceful argument
that may require further debate.

For more guidance on writing a rhetorical analysis, visit the [Illinois
Writers Workshop website](#) or watch [this tutorial](#).

# Guidelines toward Revision and the "Golden Rule" {#sect-00009}

Now that you have a working draft, your next step is to engage in peer
review, an important part of the writing process. Often, others can
identify things you have missed or can ask you to clarify statements
that may be clear to you but not to others. For your peer review, follow
these steps and make use of [\#](#).

Quickly skim through your peer's rhetorical analysis draft once, and
then ask yourself,

What is the main point or argument of my peer's work?

Highlight, underline, or otherwise make note of statements or instances
in the paper where you think your peer has made their main point.

Look at the draft again, this time reading it closely.

Ask yourself the following questions, and comment on the peer review
sheet as shown.

+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| *Peer Review: Rhetorical Analysis*                                   |
|                                                                      |
| *Name of Writer:* \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ *Name of Reviewer:*               |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_                                                     |
|                                                                      |
| *Title*                                                              |
|                                                                      |
| Is the title of this work straightforward and consistent with the    |
| content? If not, how can your peer revise their title? If the title  |
| is more creative, does it attract readers and make them want to read |
| further? If not, how can your peer revise the title?                 |
|                                                                      |
| *Thesis Statement*                                                   |
|                                                                      |
| Does the thesis statement succinctly communicate the purpose? If     |
| not, how can your peer better communicate this in a thesis           |
| statement? Does your peer offer an appropriate discussion of their   |
| chosen rhetorical topic, purpose, writer, reader(s), and context? If |
| not, how can your peer better address these areas? Does your peer    |
| address the writer's success in persuading readers and explain how   |
| the writer succeeds or does not succeed? If not, how can your peer   |
| better provide reasoning and text evidence to support their          |
| evaluation? Depending on your peer's approach, does the thesis       |
| statement appear in an appropriate place? If not, how can your peer  |
| improve the placement or strength of the statement?                  |
|                                                                      |
| *Body*                                                               |
|                                                                      |
| Does your peer mention the three major appeals and provide           |
| sufficient explanations and examples of their use? If not, what      |
| needs to be added or revised? Does your peer mention relevant        |
| rhetorical strategies and explain their functions? If not, how can   |
| your peer improve this part of the analysis? Does your peer note any |
| logical fallacies, explain why the author uses them, and analyze     |
| their effects on the text? If not, what does your peer need to add   |
| or change? Does your peer note and explain the writer's              |
| counterclaims? If the writer doesn't address them, has your peer     |
| noted this omission? If not, what does your peer need to add?        |
|                                                                      |
| *Conclusion*                                                         |
|                                                                      |
| Does the conclusion support your peer's thesis statement? If not,    |
| what revisions does your peer need to make?                          |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+

## The Golden Rule {#sect-00010}

An important part of the peer review process is to keep in mind the
familiar wisdom of the "Golden Rule": treat others as you would have
them treat you. This foundational approach to human relations extends to
commenting on others' work. Like your peers, you are in the same
situation of needing opinion and guidance. Whatever you have written
will seem satisfactory or better to you because you have written it and
know what you mean to say.

However, your peers have the advantage of distance from the work you
have written and can see it through their own eyes. Likewise, if you
approach your peer's work fairly and free of personal bias, you're
likely to be more constructive in finding parts of their writing that
need revision. Most important, though, is to make suggestions tactfully
and considerately, in the spirit of helping, not degrading someone's
work. You and your peers may be reluctant to share your work, but if
everyone approaches the review process with these ideas in mind,
everyone will benefit from the opportunity to provide and act on
sincerely offered suggestions.

# Staying Open to Feedback and Working with It {#sect-00011}

Once the peer review process is complete, your next step is to revise
the first draft by incorporating suggestions and making changes on your
own. Consider some of these potential issues when incorporating peers'
revisions and rethinking your own work.

Too much summarizing rather than analyzing

Too much informal language or an unintentional mix of casual and formal
language

Too few, too many, or inappropriate transitions

Illogical or unclear sequence of information

Insufficient evidence to support main ideas effectively

Too many generalities rather than specific facts, maybe from trying to
do too much in too little time

In any case, revising a draft is a necessary step to produce a final
work. Rarely will even a professional writer arrive at the best point in
a single draft. In other words, it's seldom a problem if your first
draft needs refocusing. However, it may become a problem if you don't
address it. The best way to shape a wandering piece of writing is to
return to it, reread it, slow it down, take it apart, and build it back
up again. Approach first-draft writing for what it is: a warm-up or
rehearsal for a final performance.

## Suggestions for Revising {#sect-00012}

When revising, be sure your thesis statement is clear and fulfills your
purpose. Verify that you have abundant supporting evidence and that
details are consistently on topic and relevant to your position. Just
before arriving at the conclusion, be sure you have prepared a logical
ending. The concluding statement should be strong and should not present
any new points. Rather, it should grow out of what has already been said
and return, in some degree, to the thesis statement. In the example of
Octavio Peterson, his purpose was to persuade readers that teaching
foreign languages in schools in Greendale should continue; therefore,
the conclusion can confirm that Peterson achieved, did not achieve, or
partially achieved his aim.

When revising, make sure the larger elements of the piece are as you
want them to be before you revise individual sentences and make smaller
changes. If you make small changes first, they might not fit well with
the big picture later on.

One approach to big-picture revising is to check the organization as you
move from paragraph to paragraph. You can list each paragraph and check
that its content relates to the purpose and thesis statement. Each
paragraph should have one main point and be self-contained in showing
how the rhetorical devices used in the text strengthen (or fail to
strengthen) the argument and the writer's ability to persuade. Be sure
your paragraphs flow logically from one to the other without distracting
gaps or inconsistencies.
