m00094

91fc827e-54b5-420b-b0d8-50b9e56819fc

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Apply knowledge of linguistic structures, including grammar and
punctuation.

Recognize and correct errors in mixed sentence construction.

A mixed-construction sentence contains parts that do not fit together
because of grammatical structure or meaning. These [sentence errors](#)
occur when writers begin a statement in one way, or one direction, and
then unintentionally change grammatical paths. This kind of sentence
construction can detract from an otherwise solidly analytical text.

*Mixed Sentence 1:* Learning to ballroom dance it has shown increased
agility, and you live longer.

*First Problem:* The reader expects a verb to follow "learning to
ballroom dance" so that *learning* will mean something. But the word
*it* interrupts before the verb appears. *It* collides with the first
part of the sentence rather than completing it, and the sentence ends up
making little sense.

*Second Problem:* The second part of the sentence, "and you live
longer," is confusing because it introduces *you* instead of continuing
the idea of learning to ballroom dance.

To eliminate confusion, you would have to rewrite either the first or
the second part of the sentence.

*Revised:* Studies have shown that learning to ballroom dance increases
agility and lengthens life span.

In fact, because it is the dancing itself and not the learning that has
these effects, the sentence could be edited further.

*Further Revision:* Ballroom dancing has been shown to increase agility
and lengthen life.

In the following examples, the writer needs to revise either the second
part to fit with the first part or the first part to fit with the
second.

*Mixed Sentence 2:* By starting my general studies classes last semester
gave me the opportunity to take classes in my major this fall.

*Second Part Revised:* By starting my general studies classes last
spring*, I had* the opportunity to take classes in my major this fall.

*First Part Revised:* *Starting* my general studies classes last spring
gave me the opportunity to take classes in my major this fall.

Read the following mixed-construction sentences, and note the ways they
have been corrected.

*Mixed Sentence 3:* For people who have hobbies, they are happier than
others.

*Revision:* People who have hobbies are happier than others.

*Mixed Sentence 4:* The required qualification is someone who writes
well.

*Problem:* The qualification is the *ability to write well*, not the
person.

*Revision:* The required qualification is the ability to write well.

*Further Revision:* The company requires someone who writes well.

*Mixed Sentence 5:* Nurses, an excellent career choice, involves an
extra semester.

*Problem:* *Nurses* are not a profession, *nursing* is.

*Revision:* Nursing, an excellent career choice, involves an extra
semester.

# *Just Because... Doesn't Mean* and *Is When* Constructions {#sect-00002}

*Just because . . . doesn't mean* constructions are common in speech but
should be avoided in writing. They are another example of mixed sentence
construction.

**Just Because . . .* Construction:* Just because I want to work in
Washington doesn't mean I'll get a good job there.

*Revision:* Simply wanting to work in Washington doesn't guarantee a
good job there. *Revision:* Although I want to work in Washington, I
will need to find a good job there.

Another common mixed construction in spoken English involves the use of
*is when*. This construction should also be avoided in writing.

**Is When* Construction:* A feeling of accomplishment is when I finish
revising a paper.

*Problem:* "A feeling of accomplishment" is a noun phrase followed by a
linking verb. This construction means that what follows the verb either
describes the noun or renames it in different words. Therefore, to
balance the sentence, you need an adjective or noun to complete the
subject. *When*, however, is an adverb referring to time, and in this
sentence, it begins an adverb clause. In other words, "a feeling" cannot
be the same as or described in terms of time.

*Revision:* A feeling of accomplishment *is finishing* revising a paper.

*Revision:* *I feel a sense* of accomplishment *when I* finish revising
a paper.

# Your Turn {#sect-00003}

Now, correct the following mixed-construction sentences. After you have
finished, go back and check your rhetorical analysis for
mixed-construction sentences, and revise them as needed.

Putting your computer to sleep is when you can save the most
electricity.

If you plant your seeds too close, anyone knows tomatoes cannot grow
with corn.

Swimming in deep water is the danger of tides.

Just because you like math doesn't mean to eliminate classes in the
humanities.

For people who want to be firefighters may have to work long and often
intense shifts.
