m00096

d5fc68dc-4c53-443c-95e4-9b3d3b8de96d

# Learning Outcomes: {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify factors that influence the ways that work is designed,
documented, and disseminated.

Apply methods and technologies commonly used for communication in
various fields.

Write an effective résumé and accompanying cover letter.

Interpret legal language and rewrite it in plain English.

In the business and legal worlds, written and spoken rhetoric is crucial
to successful outcomes and the internal workings of an organization.

# Rhetoric in Business {#sect-00002}

The ability to write persuasively by using rhetorical strategies is
crucial to the success of a business, including its profitability,
employee satisfaction, and efficient operations. More immediately,
though, using rhetorical devices to get hired is no less crucial a
skill. The purpose of business writing is often to sell, whether an
idea, a candidate, a product, or a strategy. For most people, the first
step in business writing is an effective application letter and résumé
with the goal of obtaining an interview.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

## Application Letters and Résumés {#sect-00003}

When writing letters of application and résumés, keep in mind that you
are writing to sell. In this case, you need to "sell" yourself to a
company. Thus, you want to convey information rhetorically and
persuasively. The most effective application letters have one element in
common: they focus as much as possible *not* on you, the applicant, but
on the *company* and the ways in which you could be an asset as an
employee. Therefore, keep in mind that *your* need for work is not a
real concern to a prospective employer. Rather, *their* needs and *your
potential* are. If you are applying for a job, ask yourself these
questions: What can you do to fill a present or future need? What
exactly is the employer looking for (as opposed to what *you* are
looking for)? If an employer has indicated criteria for applicants, what
are those criteria, and how can you show you fulfill them?

Keep these ideas in mind when writing an application letter. Because you
are focusing on your value to a company, do not start like this student
did:

My name is Brett Ellison. I am graduating this spring and would like to
apply for the position you have advertised. It looks interesting and
would suit me well.

It will take exciting and convincing writing to build interest after
such a generic introduction. Your name, graduation date, and opinion of
the job are of little interest to a future employer. Consider the
difference with this opening:

For the job opening you have advertised online in data management, you
have asked for a recent graduate with skills in. . . . Four years of
college with a major in computer science and an internship with Coverall
Insurance have given me the skills you require.

The applicant mentions the required skills and follows with a statement
indicating they possess the skills. When you begin this way, you
emphasize the company's needs, not your own. The first paragraph should
then end with a statement that you are attaching your current résumé and
that you request the company's consideration.

In the next paragraph, highlight a specific achievement connected to
that skill and your abilities. Include other aspects of your background
as relevant. Try to keep each paragraph to no more than six lines. If
possible, continue to focus on the company and its needs, showing that
you know something about them. Keep it short; one page will be
sufficient to highlight your skills. Avoid mentioning areas of weakness
or skills you do not have. Conclude with an expression of gratitude for
their consideration.

If you have a recommendation or lead for the job, you can naturally
begin with that, as this student did in the following letter:

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

A current résumé should always accompany your application letter. Try to
tailor your résumé to highlight unique credentials you may have and ones
that may set you apart from other applicants. Your résumé should
complement the letter, meaning the two parts should fit together and not
contradict each other. A good idea is to edit the résumé to fit the job
you want by adding or highlighting parts that pertain specifically to
the position; changing the order of details; or using italics, boldface
type, or bullets for listing facts or dates. The résumé should not be a
one-size-fits-all product or give the impression that it is a standard
statement with no real pertinence to the specific job. Use your résumé
as a selling tool to persuade a company or organization to grant you an
interview. Actually getting the job comes later.

A key element in any résumé, following your identifying information, is
a statement of your career goal. Although it is inevitable that others
will have similar plans, try to stand out by sounding decisive or
presenting a vision of what you can accomplish. Imagine being the reader
of your résumé rather than the writer. That person may devote only
seconds to skimming it, and the first thing they will notice is the
career goal, which you can change each time you send out a résumé. Your
personal aim or goal gives you the chance to indicate something in one
line that would make the reader want to continue. The following are
effective statements:

To use my programming skills to create innovative and useful content for
a growing company

To use what I have learned in management classes for the progress of a
growing firm

To contribute to a sales force based on best practices of marketing

To work in the public sector for personal as well as social progress

To combine a productive work ethic with openness to change and travel

## Sample Résumé {#sect-00004}

Below is Mikaela Rodgers's résumé:

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

Previewing a wide variety of [sample résumés](#) will give you plenty of
ideas.

# Language in Law {#sect-00005}

In the legal world, communication is equally or even more crucial. In
addition to the ability to speak convincingly, the ability to use
rhetorical strategies to write persuasively is of critical importance in
legal professions and in everyday situations regarding disputes,
contracts, and other matters involving legalities. In courtrooms and
behind the scenes, the ability to persuade a judge to make a decision or
ruling in favor of a particular client before or during a trial affects
all aspects of a case, including the legal team's ability to persuade a
jury of its position. Furthermore, disputes between family members,
buyers and sellers, renters and landlords, and employees and managers
are often settled with the help of appropriately used rhetorical
strategies.

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

Language use in the legal profession relies on *precedent*, meaning
evidence or examples of past legal cases and their verdicts. Legal
English aims to be consistent, complete, valid, and formal. It must
correspond to what is expected by the court to which it will be
communicated. Legal briefs, for example, are documents written to
persuade the court to agree with the writer's position, whether for a
plaintiff or a defendant. To gain judicial agreement, legal language
must avoid open-ended interpretations because ambiguity (two valid
points of view without a single resolution) is counterproductive.
Instead, lawyers and those who write for them often adapt a writing
template already familiar to and required by a court.

American legal English has its roots in history. It was adopted from
England, where Roman rulers and later French invaders left an
inheritance of terminology still used today. Many familiar legal terms
are hundreds of years old. For example, the verb *shall* replaces *must*
or *have to* ("The plaintiff shall . . ."). The word is an imperative,
binding and unconditional, unlike its uncertain use in modern English
("Shall I do that?"). Also, the word *consideration* indicates a sum of
money or settlement to be paid, not "the act of caring" ("The land shall
be transferred for a consideration of . . ."). Antiquated expressions
appear frequently---*heretofore*, *forthwith*, *until such time that*,
*party of the first part*, *party of the second part*, *due
process*---as do Latin expressions*---pro bono*, *pro se*, *ad hoc*,
*bona fide*, *de facto*. Doubling of concepts is also common: *null and
void*, *breaking and entering*, *pain and suffering*, *legal and
binding*.

However, the linguistic situation has changed somewhat with the move
toward "plain English," meaning avoidance of the jargon and excesses of
legal writing. Rather than long sentences and paragraphs with minimal
punctuation and spacing of text, "plain English" reforms and simplifies
the terminology to make it readily understandable for people outside the
legal profession.

## Plain English {#sect-00007}

"Plain English" was formally introduced in the United States in 2010 by
President Barack Obama in the official Plain Writing Act of 2010 adopted
by Congress. It was part of a paperwork reduction program extending to
all areas of government communication with the goal of reducing the
amount of written communication issued by all agencies. Common opinion
recognized that what needed to be said could be done more efficiently if
people understood the content of laws and regulations.

As an example, the following regulations from the New Jersey state
office for overseeing real estate transactions are unclear and
confusing. Despite the capital letters, the text consists of long, dense
paragraphs that actually discourage reading and understanding. Because a
situation in which someone breaks a lease is likely to be stressful,
language such as this, with long sentences and legal terms, only worsens
the possible confrontation. The assumption is that the tenant will have
to either wade through the language independently or rely on a lawyer as
a paid guide.

<figure id="fig-00005">

</figure>

On the other hand, the following document explains in plain English,
with short sentences and paragraphs, the procedures for securing federal
student aid. Not only are the instructions clear, but they also explain
some of the reasoning for them.

<figure id="fig-00006">

</figure>

The plain language of this document aims to make information easily
comprehensible. It is broken into brief, concise paragraphs with short,
clear sentences. Punctuation is basic and emphatic. Students already
uncertain about financial security are made to feel welcome and have the
sense that the procedure can be done without their becoming mired in
dense language and regulations.

# Your Turn {#sect-00006}

*Business.* If you have a résumé, update and revise it according to the
suggestions presented in this section. If you do not have a résumé, now
is the time to create one. Select a format and complete it with your
information, including a professional objective. (You can access the
[site](#) provided earlier in this section or consult Microsoft Word for
résumé templates.) Once you have revised or completed your résumé, find
an announcement about a summer job or internship and write an
appropriate application letter.

*Legal.* With the Plain Writing Act of 2010 in mind, rewrite the section
of the New Jersey rental agreement reproduced in this section. Change
sentence and paragraph length when appropriate to simplify language and
clarify meaning. Remember that your readers consist of average people
looking to rent an apartment.
