m00097

b1523642-a697-4512-b99e-7152dfe3f4ba

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Demonstrate, through writing, the discovery and reconsideration of
ideas.

Reflect on the development of composing practices and how those
practices influence your work.

In this reflection, think about your participation in the chapter as you
learned about and completed a rhetorical analysis assignment.
Participation includes thoughtful completion of work, working with other
students in peer review, interacting with your instructor, and raising
questions or concerns.

# Summing Up and Looking Ahead {#sect-00002}

An effective way to reflect productively is to compose a "Sum Up" entry
for yourself that you can share with your instructor or peers. Your
"Reflection on Analysis" may include what you knew of the genre before
working on this chapter and what your initial reactions were to reading
about Jamil Smith as this chapter's Trailblazer. *Will you look forward
to reading more of his work?*

You also may note your writing of the rhetorical analysis and articulate
any remaining questions about language use. *Might the experience lead
you to express yourself in a similar public forum? Which issues interest
you the most?*

While working through the sections of the chapter, *did you find any
well suited to your pace and style of writing?* As you reflect, discuss
in your own terms and in any format you choose what you learned from the
material and what, specifically, you believe will be most useful for you
in your education.

# Further Reading {#sect-00003}

Losh, Elizabeth, et al. *Understanding Rhetoric: A Graphic Guide to
Writing*. 3rd ed. Bedford/St. Martin's, 2020.

Lunsford, Andrea A., and John J. Ruszkiewicz. *Everything's an
Argument*. 9th ed. Bedford/St. Martin's, 2021.

Smith, Jamil. "After the NAACP." *New Republic*, 7 Nov. 2017,
newrepublic.com/article/145430/naacp-ben-jealous-running-governor-maryland-campaign-say-civil-rights-organization-led.

# Works Cited {#sect-00004}

Bullock, Richard H. *The Norton Field Guide to Writing*. W. W. Norton,
2006.

Connor, Jackson. "*New Republic* Editor Jamil Smith Asks for Time before
Critics Declare Magazine Dead." *HuffPost*, 6 Feb. 2015,
www.huffpost.com/entry/new-republic-jamil-smith-huffpost-live_n_6632458.

Lunsford, Andrea A. *The Everyday Writer*. 3rd ed. Bedford/St. Martin's,
2004.

Smith, Jamil. "Cleveland Native and Senior Editor at the *New Republic*
Jamil Smith Talks about His New Job, the New *New Republic*, and How the
Media Should Be Covering Race." Interview by Vince Grzegorek. *Cleveland
Scene*, 29 Apr. 2015,
www.clevescene.com/cleveland/cleveland-native-and-senior-editor-at-the-new-republic-jamil-smith-talks-about-race-his-new-job-the-new-new-republic-and-how-the-media-shou/Content?oid=4568641.

Smith, Jamil. "March 2018 Newsletter: Journalist Jamil Smith ('93)
Returns to SHHS to Discuss His Career and His *Time* Magazine Cover
Story on *Black Panther*." Interview. *Shaker Heights Schools*, Mar.
2018, www.shaker.org/protected/ArticleView.aspx?iid=6GUIAI0&dasi=2YB.

Smith, Jamil. "The Revolutionary Power of *Black Panther*." *Time*, 8
Feb. 2018, time.com/black-panther/.

Wydick, Richard C. *Plain English for Lawyers*. 3rd ed. Carolina
Academic Press, 1994.
