m00156

86c530eb-f2e4-4749-965d-43778136cac2

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Many people spend a substantial portion of their time watching and
assessing images---including photographs, memes, graphs, and
videos---via television, streaming services, and social media platforms.
Even the college curriculum is as much visual as it is verbal, including
as it does Internet research, computer graphics, and PowerPoint
presentations. These forms of media might be relatively new, but people
have been creating and consuming images for millennia, as you can see in
[\#](#). An important part of human development consists of making
images, enjoying them, and talking about them.

Formerly, visual texts were created exclusively by painters,
photographers, and others generally designated as artists. Today, given
the proliferation of technologies that enable the easy capture and
manipulation of images, such visual texts are created by a multitude of
authors. In this chapter, terms for these image creators---artist,
author, composer, creator---are used interchangeably.

Chapter 17 examines the elements of visual literacy and analysis most
likely to complement the textual literacy emphasized in first-year
writing classes and addressed in [Print or Textual Analysis: What You
Read](#). A critical understanding of visual texts is key to helping you
both as a consumer of the frequent images you encounter in reading and
viewing and as a producer who incorporates images into your own writing,
as addressed in [Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction
between Text and Image](#). Overall, this chapter provides a solid basis
for understanding visual rhetoric and communicating about it in various
situations. After study and practice, you will be able to do so while
drawing on your own cultural context, background, and experience and
considering your audience, purpose, and rhetorical context.
