m00158

0f79eb84-7bcb-414d-aec5-7c5d44f8aa14

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Interpret images through the conceptual lens of hybridity to learn,
think critically, and communicate in a variety of rhetorical and
cultural contexts.

Articulate how genre conventions are shaped by purpose, culture, and
expectation.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

"The digital sublime emerges from a collectively built hyperobject that
globally connects our nervous systems."
::::

# Sara Ludy and Hybridity {#sect-00002}

This chapter focuses on images. Still, most of the images with which
viewers interact have been either created or manipulated [digitally](#)
and contain textual, [animated](#), and cinematic content. In the field
of digital manipulation, [Sara Ludy](#) is a pioneer, combining
painting, sculpture, floral arrangements, animation, sound, and video.
She was raised in Bluemont, Virginia, a small town in the Appalachian
region. She studied at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago (SAIC)
and lived and worked in New Mexico and California before settling in
Chicago. Her work includes images of water, clouds, water vapor, birds,
fabric, glass, and plants. American painter Georgia O'Keeffe's
(1887--1986) influence---see Figure 17.12---on Ludy's work is obvious in
its lush, open petals and wings, as well as in the vibrant natural
colors.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

But Ludy also names British primatologist Jane Goodall (b. 1934);
Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges (1899--1986); and American architect,
inventor, designer R. Buckminster Fuller (1895--1983) among her
inspirations, emphasizing the hybrid nature of her work.

The concept of hybridity pervades Ludy's work, which occurs in different
media and includes a variety of topics. The concept refers to mixing and
is used in disciplines that encompass discussions of language, race,
ethnicity, and culture. Relating to digital and visual media, the term
*hybridity* incorporates pieces from each of these disciplines as well
as the blending of practical, physical, technological, and artistic
methods. The result is a piece of art that represents and speaks to
people from multiple walks of life in various visual and tactile ways.

In particular, the concept of hybridity in the arts refers to the
relationship between digital media and the creation and experience of
the artwork. Artists such as Ludy anticipate that mixture by embedding
it in their work, using digital techniques to distort or change it.

The following example of Ludy's work sheds light on her contributions to
contemporary art and the multiple directions in which visual and digital
media are headed in the 21st century.

## Second Life: Convergence of the Virtual and the Physical {#sect-00003}

[Ludy](#) works extensively in the genre of *Second Life*, capturing and
then manipulating images people have created. *Second Life* cannot be
described merely as a video game, given the seriousness with which many
people treat it and the lack of an ultimate goal or winning moment, but
it does share features commonly found in video games. It is an animated
alternative world where people spend long periods of time entertaining
themselves. It represents a virtual reality in which participants design
settings, create characters, and engage in a variety of interactions.
The goal is simply to be present in this virtual world, to create
beautiful or intriguing spaces, and to experiment with form and color in
ways that may not be possible in the real world. Ludy's *Second Life*
work removes viewers even farther from the virtual experience's
all-encompassing reality and heightens its surrealism using multiple
layers of distance.

In interviews, Ludy encourages viewers to resist the urge to experience
her work "consciously"---that is, to name or describe it. Instead, she
wants them to focus on the sensory experiences they have when
contemplating it. However, this advice is contrary to the goal of
discourse, in which you describe and assess a work and your reactions to
it. It also contradicts her own practice, in which she has commented on
the nature of her practice and her intentions. Notice how, in the video,
she talks about finding images in *Second Life* that resonate with a
sense of familiarity. While many users may see *Second Life* as a place
to invent new or unusual designs not permitted by physics, Ludy appears
to be after those designs that make people feel at home, at least to the
extent they can do so in a world constructed of binary code.

Elsewhere, Ludy describes the sublime as the happenstance that occurs
when her virtual-reality-created scenes match a real-life experience she
later has, much like witnessing an awe-inspiring natural phenomenon that
appears supernatural and then realizing its natural qualities. Ludy
instructs her viewers to "assume a prismatic quality" to her work (Ludy,
"Artist"). Therefore, viewers should look at her images more than once,
from different angles and perspectives and with different assumptions.
In the case of the discovered floral arrangement she discusses, she
refers to the pixelation---the radiation---the unintended effects of the
digital relationship with the light and the camera.

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00004}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
