m00159

b7507a70-dd26-447e-a97c-547d22928705

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Analyze and reflect on images using the language of visual rhetoric.

Articulate how genre conventions are shaped by purpose, culture, and
expectation.

Determine variations in genre conventions.

This section examines two sets of genre conventions: those associated
with *visual rhetoric* and those associated with *writing about visual
rhetoric*. The former include arrangement, color and symbol,
composition, juxtaposition, light, line, multimodality, and point of
view. These were introduced in ['Reading' Images](#) and are summarized
and defined at the end of this section. The latter
conventions---reflecting, analyzing, and writing persuasively---are
defined here with examples and suggestions for engaging in these kinds
of writing. They serve as three frameworks for communicating the variety
of human responses to images---responses that can range from apathy to
repulsion, from enjoyment to bliss---using the language of visual
rhetoric.

Reflecting and analyzing are addressed below. Writing persuasively is
addressed in [Writing Process: Thinking Critically and Writing
Persuasively about Images](#) in connection with this chapter's writing
assignment. However, remember that all writing about images relies first
on description and is persuasive in that its purpose is to convince
readers to consider the ideas presented.

# Reflecting on Images {#sect-00002}

When you reflect on an image, you process its technical elements through
the dual lens of critical thought and personal experience. You may ask
questions such as the following:

Does this image resonate with me? Why or why not?

How does this image make me feel?

What memories or associations does this image summon for me?

How might my thoughts, feelings, and associations evoked by the image
differ from those of someone else---someone of a different gender,
socioeconomic context, or culture?

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

To respond to some of these questions, consider [\#](#). Images of
nature are often used to either soothe the viewer or inspire a sense of
grandeur. Figure 17.13 has the capacity to do both. The repeating
horizontal and vertical lines, gradient color patterns, and whimsical
spots of pink and red directly offer a visual appeal that encourages
meditation and reflection. A bare understanding of the context similarly
lends a sensation of awe to the image. Ratargul is both a forest and a
swamp in a remote part of Bangladesh that floods regularly. Tourists
frequent the location, and local residents capitalize on that fact by
giving them guided boat tours along the river, despite the inherent
dangers.

But this image can be further informed by a viewer's variety of personal
experiences. Consider, for example, the extent to which you have
traveled. *Is Bangladesh within the realm of possibility for you---in
the past, now, or ever? What are your experiences as a tourist or in the
service industry? Do you think the boat operators and the photographer
have similar or different opinions of the scene?* When you think and
write critically about such questions, you deepen your understanding of
your own experiences and reactions, you interact with the experiences of
others, and you understand the world more broadly and deeply.

Remember that reflecting necessarily contains an element of speculation.
Be careful to ground your discussion in evidence---from the image
itself, from the image's context, or from your own experience. Beyond
these, such discussions devolve into self-indulgent musings that few
others can share in or learn from.

# Analyzing Images {#sect-00003}

When describing an image, you might state that a line is blue. When you
analyze an image, you might discuss what the color and the line *mean*
or *do*. The images in ['Reading' Images](#) are analyzed according to
genre elements specific to visual media. In these discussions, the
analysis begins with description, but it does not end there. The
elements of visual rhetoric are both described and analyzed to discover
the artist's intentions. (You will read a detailed analysis about
painter Charles Demuth's *Dancing Sailors* in the [Annotated Student
Sample](#).)

When you analyze an image, you contribute to an ongoing global
discussion, helping create the kaleidoscope that makes such rhetorical
discussions meaningful. Do not worry about whether your contribution is
right or wrong. Instead, consider its value to the global discussion.
*What can you say that would broaden understanding of the work of art
and your experience of the world?* This task may seem overwhelming,
especially when you consider the work of a well-known artist. But your
experiences and opinions are unique and valuable.

So far, this task sounds a lot like reflection, with one difference:
reflection focuses on personal responses, reactions, feelings, and
experiences, whereas analysis broadens that discussion to include the
effects of various technical elements on a variety of people in
different contexts. When analyzing an image, consider some of the
following questions:

Why did the creator select these particular technical elements?

How are various audiences likely to react to them?

How have interpretations of the image changed over time, or how are they
likely to change in the future?

What effect does historical or current context have on your
interpretation?

# The Language of Visual Rhetoric {#sect-00004}

Images speak to viewers in a language that short-circuits their critical
thought processes and goes directly to their sensory receptors. Yet
unlike a simple, instinctive response to stimuli, the goal of critical
thought, reflection, and discourse is to consider *how* and *why*
viewers respond the way they do to certain images. To do so, viewers
should consider the techniques that artists use to elicit such
reactions. In this way, artists and viewers create a shared language of
visual rhetoric in which both can discuss the virtues and demerits of a
work of art as well as its historical and artistic contributions.

# Key Terms in Visual Rhetoric {#sect-00005}

Arrangement

:

Artists arrange their work to emphasize certain aspects and to create
patterns of repetition and variation. The term

composition

is often used to mean

arrangement

.

Color

and

symbol

:

Images communicate their meaning in part through the variety and
interplay among colors. Even the choice to use black and white or a
monochrome color palette is a color choice. Symbols in images allude to
deeper meanings.

Composition

:

Composition is often used as an umbrella term encompassing all aspects
of visual rhetoric. It can also be used synonymously with

arrangement

to indicate how the piece is put together.

Juxtaposition

:

In visual art, juxtaposition is the placement of contrasting images
close together to emphasize their connection, lack of connection, or
incongruity.

Light

:

Unique to images is the use of light to highlight or obscure various
parts of an image or to create prismatic effects that enhance its
repetitive aspects.

Line

:

In addition to outline shapes, artists use line to focus or center the
viewer's eye and then to move it across the image in certain
predetermined patterns.

multimodal

:

Multimodality is the use of more than one type of literacy within a
single work. For example, an airline display board is a multimodal work
because it requires viewers both to understand ways of reading airport
codes, time zones, and visual representations of temporal data and to
relate that information to the their current circumstances.
Multimodality is a theory, perspective, or method that incorporates the
consideration of all elements of an image.

Point of view

:

Also called

perspective

, point of view encompasses what an image includes, what it excludes,
and where its focus lies.
