m00160

4a909da6-0e47-4fac-acc5-3e0d39628ed6

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Determine the context of an image.

Analyze the rhetorical techniques common to images.

Analyze a variety of texts according to organizational patterns and
rhetorical techniques.

# Introduction {#sect-00002}

Below you will find a student analysis of a painting by Charles Demuth.
As you read it, pay careful attention to the way in which the student
author, Leo Davis, describes technical details of the painting, such as
color, line, and technique. Also notice the way he analyzes those
details, moving beyond mere description into the realms of context,
analysis, and reflection.

# Meet American Modernist and Precisionist Charles Demuth (1883--1935) {#sect-00003}

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Charles Demuth was an American painter of the modernist and precisionist
movements. Trained at the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts, he traveled
to Europe and worked as an illustrator before striking out on his own,
first as a watercolorist and then as an oil painter. His watercolors
follow languid lines of vegetation, reproducing plants and flowers in
stronger geometric patterns than those of his friend and fellow artist
Georgia O'Keeffe (1887--1986). His work in the precisionist movement,
like that of other similar artists, often focuses on industrial subjects
enhanced by exaggerated geometric techniques. Few human characters
appear in Demuth's paintings, which tend to erase any suggestion of his
own personality or brushstroke on the artwork.

Demuth was a keen wit with a vibrant social presence in New York, Paris,
and London. He cultivated his friendships as avidly as he did his art,
and his company was much prized. His homosexuality was likely well known
among his circle of friends, although his works depicting gay subculture
in major metropolitan areas were only privately circulated. These works,
including [*Dancing Sailors*](#) seen in black and white in [\#](#), are
today shedding light on the ways in which LGBTQ people engaged with one
another and society more than 100 years ago.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

# Analysis of *Dancing Sailors* by Charles Demuth {#sect-00004}

Four male sailors dance on a checked floor with arched lines in the
background. Two of the men dance with women, while two of them dance
with each other. This painting is done in watercolor and graphite and
focuses on the sailor on the far left. The other figures face him, and
his posture draws the viewer's eye to his face. The man and woman on the
far right seem completely involved with each other. The two couples in
the middle are drawn sensually, with passion, but none of them focus on
their own partners. Instead, the two sailors with their backs to the
viewer stare at one another. The sailor on the left appears quite
aggressive, with an arched back and bent knees suggesting a pelvic
thrust. Although his dance partner is a woman, he holds her right hand
at arm's length, away from his body, and stares past her toward the
sailor next to him. Strong pencil strokes emphasize his eyes and
eyebrows, pointing the viewer to the object of his stare. The central
sailor is dancing with a man in a mutual embrace, but his attention is
fixed on the sailor at left, his head tilted slightly and his expression
receptive. The painting is signed and dated: "C Demuth - 1918 -."

Description. *The initial paragraph focuses extensively on the visual
elements of the painting, with a few analytical passages. Leo Davis uses
descriptive, artistic terminology such as "arched," "watercolor and
graphite," and "\[s\]trong pencil strokes" to help readers visualize the
painting.*

Line and Arrangement. *Davis provides some details about the artistic
techniques used, such as the strong pencil strokes and the way the image
"emphasize\[s\] his eyes and eyebrows."*

Analysis. *The author explains the effect of these elements and
techniques to interpret the poses and intentions of the characters in
the painting.*

## A Vibrant Subculture and a World in Crisis {#sect-00005}

*Dancing Sailors* was painted by Charles Demuth (1883--1935), a key
figure in early-20th-century modernism. Best known as a watercolorist,
Demuth also painted the gay subculture in jazz clubs and underground
bars in New York City in works that he kept secret. As a gay man, he
frequently visited Manhattan during the Harlem Renaissance and
participated in this culture, savoring the artistic and erotic intensity
of the Jazz Age.

Although the art movement in the early 20th century was vibrant, its
context was depressing. The United States entered World War I
(1914--1918) in April 1917. A month later, the Selective Service Act was
passed, and thousands of American men were drafted into military
service. In March 1918, the United States was hit with the influenza
pandemic. Twenty million people died in the war, and another 50 million
died from the flu.

Meanwhile, in 1916, the U.S. military began using so-called blue
discharges to force gay people out of the armed forces. By 1919, sailors
were arrested and court-martialed for homosexual activity. It seems
seriously unfair that someone who fought in the war could come back home
and be convicted as a criminal just for his sexual orientation.

In this context, with death seemingly everywhere and gay men hated,
Demuth created striking watercolors that say a lot about his times.
Because he did not share these paintings publicly, he was probably
afraid of revealing his own homosexuality. But that did not stop him
from making art that reflected his own desires. *Dancing Sailors*, now
in possession of the Cleveland Museum of Art in Ohio, was not intended
for public exhibition.

Context. *In these four well-organized paragraphs, Davis outlines the
painting's context: key details about the artist's personal life, the
military and domestic situations in America, and Demuth's place in this
world. Davis focuses on the aspects most relevant to the artwork,
keeping the context short and pointed.*

## Tension within a Painting {#sect-00006}

The perspective, or point of view, of the painting is high, as shown by
the angle of the black-and-white checkerboard floor and where it hits
the wall. The figures are shown in a practical close-up, so that their
feet and the tops of their heads are not included in the frame. This
perspective is very intimate, but with the audience intruding on the
scene. All of the couples hold each other closely and tightly, and the
audience is almost uncomfortably close.

Point of View. *Davis returns to technical description, indicating the
artist's perspective and how it affects the viewer.*

Demuth uses watercolor to outline the dancers' bodies, making the
clothing almost transparent. The silhouette of the pants emphasizes the
bulge of thigh and calf muscles, and the arches in the background
suggest erections. For both men, the buttocks are outlined and
emphasized. The male dancers are clearly wearing uniforms, but Demuth
chooses not to include insignias, medals, or other identifying marks.
Perhaps he was simply not interested in military rank and regulation. Or
maybe he wanted to direct the viewer's attention elsewhere. The two
women in the painting are incidental, their bodies largely obscured by
the men. Although the figures are outlined in graphite, the textured
watercolor unites the dancers with the background, making them seem very
much like they belong in this scene of intimacy.

Artistic Medium and Line. *Davis discusses the medium---watercolor---and
how Demuth's use of it creates the impression of tight clothing.
Importantly, the author does not assume intent on Demuth's part,
although he speculates. Instead, he limits his analysis to the details
and artistic techniques of the painting.*

Technical Description. *Again, the author keeps this paragraph focused
on an element of artistic design: the watercolor. He backs his assertion
with evidence from the painting. Instead of simply saying that the men
are wearing tight clothing, he describes the artist's use of watercolor
to create the impression of tight clothing.*

The painting appears to tell a story, but only in part. The viewer is
invited to fill in the blanks. The sailors in the foreground are
blatantly flirting with one another. And the central sailor's direct
stare at the viewer may be considered an invitation. His wide-eyed
expression, slight smile, and hands curled to embrace his dance
partner's torso indicate pleasure. The viewer knows something this
sailor does not: his part of this story is unlikely to have a happy
ending. The female dance partners, while largely obscured, are still
individuals with strong personalities. The woman on the left has a
vacant stare from half-closed eyes, and her indifferent posture suggests
that she may be bored, but the curve of her hip is still sexual. Is she
offended by her partner's distraction?

Arrangement. *Davis invites viewers to "read" the painting, to see the
story being told by the arrangement, which also invites them to notice
the two women.*

Rhetorical Question. *This technique allows the student author to pose
provocative questions that have no clear answers. In combination with
the accompanying analysis, the rhetorical question helps establish the
tone and theme of the painting that Leo Davis wishes to explore.*

## Lasting Significance {#sect-00007}

Demuth was a gay man during a difficult time in American history. This
painting, one of many he kept private, is sympathetic and nonjudgmental.
These private paintings may have been his attempt to find and show his
acceptance of his own identity. During World War I, many military men
came to port cities such as New York. Also during that time, Demuth
enjoyed the Manhattan nightlife, and he painted a number of scenes of
this changing environment. His personal involvement is interesting in
and of itself. But even more so, these private paintings document the
emergence of a sexual subculture and mark an important moment in
American gay history.

Context and Analysis. *The author uses context and analysis to reach a
conclusion about Demuth's intention in creating the painting and its
significance in the history of American homoerotic art.*

Although Demuth died at the relatively early age of 52, his work remains
influential in American art. The geometric background of *Dancing
Sailors* shows his increased interest in architectural watercolors.
Later in his career, these paintings were hailed as key to the
development of the precisionist movement. His unique expressions of
modernism are a precursor to the abstract expressionism that developed
in the 1940s and later influenced pop art innovators such as Andy Warhol
(1928--1987). Aside from its historical significance, the vibrant
sensuousness of *Dancing Sailors* continues to have relevance and appeal
for art lovers today.

Context. *Leo Davis concludes by extending his argument for Demuth's
influence, tracing the effect of his work through later artists and
movements and stating the reason* Dancing Sailors *continues to have
value as a work of art.*

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00008}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
