m00161

c30cc96b-f274-4f62-ac49-f7e35687ccaf

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Develop a writing project through multiple drafts.

Employ a variety of drafting strategies to complete an analysis of
images.

Apply aspects of visual rhetoric to a writing project.

Participate in the collaborative and social aspects of writing
processes.

Give and act effectively on productive feedback.

In this section, you will combine what you learned earlier about
reflecting on and analyzing images with another way of writing about
images: writing persuasively, or persuading. Like reflecting and
analyzing, writing persuasively requires clear, vivid descriptions of
the technical aspects of an artwork, such as point of view, arrangement,
color, and symbolism, as explained in [Glance at Genre: Relationship
Between Image and Rhetoric](#). Remember that reflecting on an image
helps you make sense of both the image and your experience from
different perspectives. Reading other people's reflections expands your
universe of experience. Analyzing images improves your critical thinking
skills by synthesizing description, reflection, and logical thinking to
determine what an image's design elements mean. You write persuasively
about images when you determine that an image's meaning has or does not
have a value (that you define) for its viewers. For example, Leo Davis,
in his analysis of *Dancing Sailors* in [Annotated Student Sample](#),
determines the homoerotic message in the image and the painter's tone or
attitude toward his subject. You can also extend the scope of persuasion
to make a recommendation about the status or merit of the work, as you
will do in this assignment.

# Writing Persuasively about Images {#sect-00002}

Like reflection, persuasion starts with context and description and can
include personal reflections. The difference is primarily in the purpose
and often the tone, or attitude toward the subject and audience. The
purpose generally falls into one of three categories:

What is the image's value?

In the art world, these discussions are commonplace. Major publications
such as the

New Yorker

or

Harper's Magazine

publish reviews of artists, galleries, and exhibitions. Critics and
scholars argue that such discussions serve to establish a society's
values and to benchmark the limits of what a society will and will not
tolerate. Certainly, 2020 witnessed an explosion of such conversations.
Protestors created images meant for display on public property, many of
which were identified as graffiti or acts of vandalism; streets and
other locations were renamed to reflect a growing awareness of the role
that Black excellence has played in America's history; and monuments and
memorials relating to injustice were reevaluated, vandalized, and
removed.

What happened?

Forensic arguments often relate to legal situations, in which lawyers,
judges, and juries try to determine what happened and how to respond. In
the case of images, these techniques are applied to assess the
circumstances of an image's creation as well as its critical and modern
reception.

What should happen?

In the public sector, officials decide whether to fund artistic works.
In the private sector, companies decide on images that faithfully
represent their brands and values.

In persuasive writing, the purpose is usually revealed in a thesis
statement, a single sentence, sometimes two, that defines the author's
position and gives one or more reasons for it. The thesis usually
appears at the end of the introduction, although it can occur at the
start of either the introduction or the conclusion.

Look again at [\#](#), in which a woman wears a mask that reads, "I
can't breathe." [\#](#) below outlines a thesis statement based on that
image that might apply to each of the three persuasive writing purposes.

  *Persuasion Purpose*           *Sample Thesis Statement*
  ------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  *What is the image's value?*   The image of the mask, its text, and the woman wearing it convey an important message that serves as a valuable artifact representing many of the complexities of 2020.
  *What happened?*               The mask wearer is sending a valuable message that people need to hear in the context of the controversies surrounding both the pandemic and the racial situation in America in 2020.
  *What should happen?*          The mask's message and context are inflammatory during a public health crisis; therefore, the use of masks with potentially political commentary should be discouraged in public places.

  : Sample thesis statements by persuasion purpose {#table-00001}

## Tone {#sect-00003}

The tone of a persuasive piece can range from educational to impassioned
and is largely based on the audience to which it is directed. Most
writing about images is done in the neutral tone typically adopted in
academic writing, although you may find reviews or essays that are
informal and others that are scholarly.

## Taking a Side {#sect-00004}

In ['Reading' Images](#), you read a description of and some reflections
on [\#](#), an image of woman wearing a mask reading, "I Can't Breathe."
You also read a brief analysis of the figure, combining description,
historical context, and the visual design element of juxtaposition. Now,
in [\#](#), look at what two sides of a persuasive discussion of Figure
17.3 might look like.

+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| *Side A*                         | *Side B*                         |
+==================================+==================================+
| Purpose / Thesis                                                    |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Figure 17.3 represents an        | Figure 17.3 depicts an ordinary  |
| important moment in American     | occurrence and does not warrant  |
| history and should be included   | inclusion in a yearbook          |
| in a yearbook recording          | recording historical events of   |
| historical events of 2020.       | 2020.                            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| Audience                                                            |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Committee commissioned by the National Endowment for the Humanities |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Context                                                             |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| The committee has been commissioned to publish a yearbook of 2020,  |
| entitled *The Year Democracy Roared*. They are looking for pictures |
| that represent large movements in America in 2020 that tie into the |
| country's history and depict individuals in interesting or unique   |
| settings.                                                           |
+---------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Evidence                                                            |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| The image features a Black woman | Many people wore masks in 2020   |
| wearing a mask that reads, "I    | for reasons unassociated with    |
| Can't Breathe." The pandemic of  | politics or controversy. Many    |
| 2020 caused many people to wear  | people decorated their masks     |
| masks, either by choice or by    | with a variety of images and     |
| mandate. Some people did not     | slogans. The choice of whether   |
| support mask wearing because of  | to wear a mask was, in many      |
| their political beliefs          | cases, not a choice but a        |
| regarding personal liberties.    | mandate. This woman is not in    |
| During 2020, the Black Lives     | obvious distress or at a         |
| Matter movement gained           | protest. The image includes      |
| widespread support. "I Can't     | another woman, reflected in the  |
| Breathe" was one of several      | first woman's sunglasses, not    |
| slogans adopted by the Black     | wearing a mask, calling into     |
| Lives Matter movement. The image | question the seriousness of her  |
| juxtaposes the mask with the     | mask message. The woman does not |
| slogan in an ironic statement    | appear to be part of a larger    |
| open to multiple                 | movement, engaged in a unique or |
| interpretations.                 | interesting activity, or placed  |
|                                  | in an unusual setting.           |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

: Elements of a persuasive argument about an image {#table-00002}

# Summary of Assignment: Writing Persuasively about an Image {#sect-00005}

Public works projects such as stadiums or convention centers, private
developments such as condominiums and shopping centers, and online
spaces such as websites and social media platforms all commission
artists to create exclusive works for display. These works are intended
to reflect the vision of the artist as well as to promote the brand or
mission of the space. Imagine that you have been asked to analyze an
artist's work to determine whether the artist should contribute to the
development of a local space that you select. Select the work of an
artist, either [Sara Ludy](#) or another artist whose work is familiar
to you or whose work you would like to learn more about. See [Further
Resources](#) at the end of this chapter for suggested museums to visit
in person or online. You can choose from historical figures or living
artists. You can even choose an artist who illustrated a graphic novel
you have read. Once you have chosen an artist and an image created by
that artist, identify the aspects of the work you wish to assess, and
support your analysis with technical descriptions of the image. Then,
explain why you reached your decision about the artist's contribution to
the selected space.

The parts in this section will take you through the development of a
sample essay, using the example of American sculptor James Earle
Fraser's (1876--1953) *Equestrian Statue of Theodore Roosevelt*. As you
follow along in this process, consider how it applies to your topic.
Think of the process as divided into these six steps:

Identify the rhetorical situation.

Outline the elements you intend to analyze.

Write an introduction in which you frame the image and the context in
which you intend to discuss it.

As you draft, or before you draft the body of the essay, write topic
sentences to identify the focus of each paragraph on a specific
technical or contextual aspect of the image.

Build your paragraphs by describing the relevant elements.

Conclude by suggesting directions to consider in the future.

Another Lens 1. Visit [Sara Ludy's website](#) and select an image, a
rendering, or an animation that speaks to you in some way, and identify
the technical aspects you wish to assess. Support your analysis with
descriptions of the image, using the vocabulary introduced in ["Reading"
Images](#) and [Glance at Genre: Relationship Between Image and
Rhetoric](#). Then, as an option, consider whether or not you would
advise an individual to purchase the work or how you would advise an
organization to use it (or not use it) as a representative image---for
example, as part of a logo or cover for a publication.

Another Lens 2. Another option for assessing an artist's work is to
compare and contrast this work with another piece, either by Sara Ludy
or by a different artist. In doing so, you may consider ways in which
the artist and their work have changed over time, or you may consider
the influence one artist has on another. Finally, you may consider the
images in different contexts through the lens of the artists'
experiences, places in history, personal identities, and artistic
practices.

Another Lens 3. Consider a work from a multimodal perspective. If you
are interested in the connections of art and culture, consider choosing
a piece of historic or contemporary Native American art. You can find
information and view images at the websites for the [National Museum of
the American Indian](#) and the [*Hearts of Our People: Native Women
Artists*](#) exhibition at the Smithsonian American Art Museum. Create
an infographic or a short video assessing the chosen artwork. An
infographic incorporates multiple images and texts into a single image
that can be read and understood quickly. A short video could work in a
similar way, but the images would be presented sequentially with
narration, either spoken or written. Your multimodal work should
consider the elements of visual rhetoric discussed throughout this
chapter and combine reflection with analysis and persuasion. See
[Multimodal and Online Writing: Creative Interaction between Text and
Image](#) for more information on creating a multimodal work.

# Identify Rhetorical Context {#sect-00009}

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

In this writing example, the statue of former U.S. president Theodore
Roosevelt (1858--1919) ([\#](#)) is analyzed as part of the museum's
decision to keep it or remove it. To begin, the author of this paper (a
college student, U.S. citizen, and nursing major) defines the rhetorical
situation: purpose, audience, genre, stance, context, and culture.
Complete the first step in the assignment as this author has done by
consulting the writer's triangle to sketch out these elements. The
writer's triangle ([\#](#)) includes audience, genre, and stance and is
surrounded by the circle of context/culture. The image allows you to
"shorthand" your ideas about these elements during the brainstorming
phase, as the author has done beneath the figure.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Purpose:

To analyze the Equestrian Statue of Theodore Roosevelt

Audience:

Instructor, fellow students, and U.S. residents

Genre:

Print or digital newsletter or magazine article

Stance:

To support the American Museum of Natural History's decision to remove
the statue of Theodore Roosevelt

Context:

Roosevelt's presidency and what he accomplished, the relationship
between him and the American Museum of Natural History, and the elements
of the statue warranting its inclusion or exclusion

Culture:

Critics have said that the statue depicts Black people and Native
Americans as conquered and culturally substandard.

Note: Do not confuse context with your rhetorical situation, which, in
this case, is a writing assignment for a college course, part of a
portfolio and a learning technique in which you practice a type of civil
discourse. Meanwhile, context in this case refers to the image---the
circumstances of its creation, its technical elements, and how its
meaning may change over time.

Sometimes the elements of your rhetorical situation are not made
explicit. Signs that you need clarification include the following:

Trouble getting started

Difficulty understanding how much background information to provide

Not knowing which terms are too technical or which need to be defined

For clarity about purpose, audience, genre, or culture, talk to your
peers and instructor using the questions in [\#](#) as a guide.

               *Questions to Consider*                                                                                                                                      *Your Responses*
  ------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------
  *Purpose*    With regard to the image, are you writing to describe, to reflect, to analyze, or to evaluate (persuade)?                                                    
  *Audience*   Who is the audience? What do they already know about the image? What do they need to know? Toward what cultural issues might you need to show sensitivity?   
  *Genre*      What are the characteristics of the genre in which you will compose your analysis of the image?                                                              
  *Stance*     What direction should your thesis statement take?                                                                                                            
  *Context*    Within what social, political, economic, or cultural context was the image created, and for what purpose?                                                    
  *Culture*    What cultural issues are related to the image? From what cultural viewpoint are you writing? What is the cultural viewpoint of your audience?                

  : Questions to determine the elements of your rhetorical situation
  {#table-00003}

Regarding context, you may need to do some research on the image:

Who is the image's author?

When was it created?

For what purpose was it created?

Has the image been featured in reviews or the news?

Does the image include important symbols or references?

After you have defined your rhetorical situation, write a working thesis
for your paper. Consider using one or a combination of these frames. You
may change the phrasing as needed to make your point.

The artist's choice of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ shapes the viewer's
understanding of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The artist incorporates \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ to symbolize \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The image's point of view reveals that \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The artist's style, including \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, suggests that
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The image evokes feelings of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

# The Visual to the Textual {#sect-00010}

After you have a working thesis, move on to the next major step:
outlining the visual elements you intend to analyze. Review the material
in ["Reading" Images](#) and [Glance at Genre: Relationship Between
Image and Rhetoric](#). In the case of the Roosevelt statue, the author
has thought about which technical elements of the statue to analyze. The
author also has considered the important aspects of the historical
context shaping Theodore Roosevelt's life, presidency, and legacy; the
museum and the cultural events in the year the statue was erected; and
the cultural events in the year the decision is being made about whether
to remove the statue. Remember that you may need to do some additional
research to supplement your understanding of the context.

## Analyze the Image {#sect-00011}

With a larger understanding of your subject's social, political, and
cultural context, you can now begin to analyze the image. Limit your
descriptions to what you can see and what your observations imply.
Consider the following examples:

Pattern.

Identify the repetition of the figures, but note the differences in the
ways each is depicted. Identify any lines or other elements that are
repeated with variation.

Point of view.

The statue is tall and on a pedestal, requiring viewers to look up or
see it from a distance.

Arrangement.

Three figures are arranged in a triangle, suggesting an apex with two
supporting angles. Among the figures, the president is tallest, always
visible, whereas the two accompanying figures can be seen fully only
from either the front or the back. From the side, one or the other is
always obscured.

Symbolism.

Each man is dressed in the clothing representative of his homeland. The
two to the side are clearly allegorical, whereas the one on top is given
individuality and freedom of expression.

Conclusion.

Outline criteria that could be used in the future to determine how
symbols of or memorials to historical figures should be assessed.

## Write an Introduction {#sect-00012}

In your introduction, name the artist, the image, and the context in
which you intend to discuss it. See the suggestions above for research
you may need to do regarding context. If you do research, remember to
cite the sources you use because this information did not originate with
you. The context may consist of one or two paragraphs, depending on how
much information your audience needs to understand your analysis. (This
is one reason to have a good understanding of your audience.) This type
of introduction appears frequently in visual analyses and persuasive
papers.

The two keys to writing a strong context are (1) being selective about
what you include and (2) framing your own analysis. For example,
Theodore Roosevelt is an important historical figure, and many books
have been written about him. Even two paragraphs are insufficient to
summarize every relevant detail about him. Likewise, the American Museum
of Natural History plays a significant role in documenting mammalian
life and has a vital, if at times controversial, role in American
scientific history. In the two paragraphs below, the author selects
details about the president, the museum, and the statue that both
highlight the reasons they are admired and touch on their potential
failings. These details are not all-inclusive; they are carefully culled
from all of the available information to lead up to the subsequent
analysis, which focuses on the reasons to remove the statue. The last
sentence in the second paragraph is the thesis, in which the author
states her agreement with the museum's decision.

## Contextual Introduction {#sect-00013}

Theodore Roosevelt cultivated a hearty outdoor lifestyle, exploring the
Dakota Territory in the 1890s, serving as a Rough Rider during the
Spanish-American War (1898), and advocating for the conservation of
America's natural resources. Despite criticism for the way in which he
acquired the land and rights to construct the Panama Canal, he was
widely respected both at home and abroad, being awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize (1906) for helping negotiate a peace treaty between Japan and
Russia. After his presidency, he traveled extensively throughout Africa
and South America, where he killed many animals and returned them to
serve as specimens in America's natural history museums. He was himself
shot while campaigning, but as the bullet did not penetrate his lung, he
gave his speech regardless, earning him the reputation of a bull moose.

A statue commemorating Roosevelt was presented to the public in 1940,
two decades after his death, and placed in front of the American Museum
of Natural History in New York City, where Roosevelt served as governor
from 1899 to 1900. On one side of Roosevelt, depicted on horseback at
the center of the sculpture, walks an African person, and on the other
an Indigenous person. All three figures have a straight, proud posture
and look directly ahead of them, toward the future. Given its placement,
the statue is likely intended as an allegory, depicting the men of two
continents---Africa and North America, including its Indigenous
people---on a voyage of discovery and learning. Over time, however, and
given the hierarchical framing of the image, with the White man clothed
in a suit and atop a horse, central to the image, the statue's meaning
has changed, leading to the praiseworthy and long-awaited decision to
remove it in 2020.

## Create Topic Sentences {#sect-00014}

Use the models below to create your own topic sentences to focus each
paragraph on a specific technical or contextual aspect of the image.

Pattern.

The sculpture unites the three figures---four, including the
horse---primarily through the repetition of musculature, armor, weapons,
and costumes.

Point of view.

Because the sculpture is large, tall, and set on a pedestal, it requires
viewers either to look up at it or to regard it from a distance---both
postures requiring a certain degree of reverence.

Arrangement.

The sculpture's three human figures are arranged in a triangle,
suggesting an apex with two supporting angles.

Symbolism.

Each man is dressed in the clothing of his homeland, giving each
allegorical significance as racial, rather than individual,
representations.

## Build Body Paragraphs {#sect-00015}

Support each topic sentence by describing in detail the elements you
have chosen to assess. When describing the image, avoid overuse of
adjectives and adverbs. Use concrete rather than abstract nouns.
Abstract nouns name ideas, such as *perspective* or *theme*; concrete
nouns refer to specific, tangible elements, such as *triangle*, *line*,
or *granite*. Incorporate strong verbs as well as the necessary forms of
*to be* (*is*, *are*, *was*, *were*). Think about what the features in
the image are *doing---*the ways they interact with one another, the
space around them, and the viewer's relationship to them. Finally, avoid
speculation while going beyond description. Keep the discussion rooted
in the evidence, and show readers what the evidence points to, what it
means.

## Sample Body Paragraph: Arrangement {#sect-00016}

The sculpture's three human figures are arranged in a triangle,
suggesting an apex with two supporting angles. President Roosevelt is by
far the tallest of the three and always visible from whichever angle the
viewer faces the sculpture. Meanwhile, the two flanking figures can be
seen fully only from the front or the back, suggesting that they lack
nuance or subtlety because they can be seen and understood only
directly. When seen from an angle, they are either overshadowed by the
White man on horseback or disappear from view. Similarly, level with the
Native American and the African is the horse, all three depicted with
sharply defined muscles, highlighting their strength. Roosevelt is
similarly well defined but fully clothed and towering over both the
animal and the two men. Overall, the sculpture suggests, at the very
least, a hierarchy among the three men and, at worst, a dominance of the
White man over those of color.

## Formulate a Conclusion {#sect-00017}

After you have developed the body paragraphs in which you analyze and
reflect on the image, conclude by expanding on your thesis and
suggesting directions to consider in the future. One important role of
the conclusion is to further the discourse by showing how this
rhetorical moment is merely one example of other such discourses and how
they can be used productively in other contexts. In this case, an
effective strategy would be to outline criteria for memorials of
historical figures, even those with complicated legacies and flaws.

## Sample Conclusion {#sect-00018}

The people concerned with public spaces---city planners, museum
curators, and government and other leaders---must determine who is
worthy of remembrance and how. In doing so, they need to consider
historical, contextual, cultural, and artistic concerns, and they must
seek and respond to public input. Now is the time to draft guidelines
for these decisions.

# Separate the Personal from the Technical {#sect-00019}

After you have drafted your paper, you are ready to review the work of
your peers while they review your work. Keep in mind that you and your
peers are almost certainly going to respond to images differently. This
is the value of critical discourse about visual rhetoric: pooling shared
responses and experiences helps develop a greater understanding of the
human condition. As you review your peers' writing, part of your task is
to separate your personal responses from the writer's analysis of the
image's technical elements.

Here are some topics and questions to get you started on a peer analysis
of someone else's work:

Consider the context, including culture.

Indicate places where the writer has done well or can supply more
information.

In what ways has the author included enough information to prepare you
for the analysis?

What else would you like to know?

Is any information superfluous or irrelevant?

In what ways has the author addressed cultural issues---their own and
those of the intended audience?

What else should be considered?

Read the first sentence of each paragraph.

Write your answers to these questions.

Does a clear outline emerge?

What, if any, changes can you suggest to improve the flow?

Examine each paragraph.

Highlight places where descriptions or analyses are insufficient, and
make suggestions for improvement.

In what ways does the paragraph reflect a clear, vivid, and technical
description of the image?

In what ways does the paragraph move beyond description into analysis to
explain the effect of the technical elements?

Read the conclusion.

If the author has not outlined strategies for the future or contributed
to ongoing discourse, provide your suggestions, or brainstorm some ideas
with them.

# Hone Your Practice {#sect-00020}

Writing the first draft is hard work, and you are right to feel pride
and a sense of accomplishment after completing it. Thus, any critique
can feel unjust and even personally wounding. Remember, though, that
writing is a process and that everyone is an apprentice, working toward
expertise and, eventually, mastery. So take every opportunity you can to
learn from others and hone your skills.

First, reward yourself for completing the first draft. You may choose to
take a long walk, prepare a favorite meal, or enjoy some leisure time
with friends. Savor the moment. Time away from the writing process is
time for your writing and thinking muscles to recover. Consider some
light reading. Think about it this way---you'll never build muscle if
you go to the gym all day while you starve yourself. In the same way,
you've expended a lot of vocabulary and sentence- structure energy. Feed
it to rebuild it.

Finally, return to your work with a goal in mind and a plan to put it
into place. Look at the feedback you received. *Does your work require
major revision or minor tweaks?* If the latter, then your task is
simple: make a to-do list and get started! If the former, go back to the
drawing board and diagnose your own process, considering the following
questions:

Is your current understanding of context, culture, audience, or purpose
different from what it was at the outset? If so, what changes do you
need to make?

Are your descriptions insufficient, unclear, or vague? Revisit

"Reading" Images

and

Glance at Genre: Relationship Between Image and Rhetoric

and consider the terminology and techniques introduced there in light of
your image.

Is your analysis insufficient or missing? Review

Glance at Genre: Relationship Between Image and Rhetoric

and the example in

Writing Process: Thinking Critically and Writing Persuasively about
Images

. Reflect on your image and consider your assumptions.

Do you have a clear introduction, conclusion, and body paragraphs with
topic sentences? Is each paragraph fleshed out with meaningful
descriptions and analysis?

After you think about these topics and take notes based on your
thoughts, you can make a plan and revise your work with confidence.
