m00164

5395bbc9-c323-40d0-a85f-c2b2006d5ca1

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Examine and apply key techniques used in film and movies to personal
rhetorical and cultural contexts.

Implement a variety of technologies to address a range of audiences.

Create a multimodal work that incorporates visual rhetorical techniques.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Lights, Camera Angles, Actions {#sect-00002}

This chapter focuses largely on still images, but many of the same
principles apply to moving images, or film. Documentaries in particular
combine a series of still or moving images with historical and narrative
text. This section shows how the concepts of visual rhetoric apply to
the documentary work of Ken Burns. It also encourages you to examine
your experience through such techniques by creating a film
autobiography.

The field of movie and film artistry is vast, constituting an entire
field of study in its own right. One notable figure in the field is the
American history film documentarian Ken Burns (b. 1953), who is
responsible for nearly 200 films as writer, director, producer, or all
of the above. From *The Civil War* (1990) to *The Vietnam War* (2017),
from *Jackie Robinson* (2016) to *Country Music* (2019), Ken Burns has
documented the American experience in richer and more layered ways than
can be achieved via print text alone.

Burns's style is deceptively simple. His documentaries are narrated in
an informative, objective manner, sometimes by a well-known figure in
politics, sports, or entertainment whose work is related to the
documentary topic. The images consist of archival footage, which differs
depending on the topic, ranging from black-and-white photographs to
grainy home videos. These are interspersed with interviews from
eyewitnesses and experts.

Of the many techniques that Burns employs, three are of particular
interest: foreshadowing, the personal vs. the universal, and
juxtaposition.

## Foreshadowing {#sect-00003}

Documentaries are not known for being riveting, suspenseful,
edge-of-your seat thrillers, but Ken Burns keeps audiences enthralled
for hours on end. *The Civil War*, for example, consists of nine
episodes totaling 11 hours and 30 minutes. One important way Burns keeps
audiences engaged is by implying that things are not as they seem or
that a major change is just on the horizon. Such warnings are delivered
by his narrators often just after a peak emotional moment either of
contentment and resolution or of fear and anxiety. The effect is to make
the audience question what could possibly happen next and to keep them
tuned in for the next episode.

## The Personal vs. the Universal {#sect-00004}

History may move in giant sweeps across times and places, but it happens
day by day with the mundane choices made by ordinary people. Burns
excels at highlighting the small, personal tales of individuals who
changed the course of history and the ways massive historical movements
affected individual people's lives. The back-and-forth of these forces
plays out in his work like a delicate ballet in which the lead dancers
move toward and away from one another on stage, amplifying the tension
each time.

## Juxtaposition {#sect-00005}

Like any serious historian, Burns is interested not merely in *what*
happened but also in *why.* This investigation requires that he go
beyond appearances, a challenge for a filmmaker who relies on images to
make his meaning clear to viewers. Burns often demonstrates for viewers
how people and events converge by showing an ordinary American soldier,
farmer, or sports figure, for example, alongside a powerful political
figure. Alternatively, he may pan out from a newspaper headline only to
zoom in on a story printed deep within the fold. In the viewer's mind,
the placement of such figures plants an impression that is immediately
upended or replaced. The experience can be jarring, but the technique
leads to deep learning and retention, which is one reason Burns's
documentaries leave a lasting impression on his audience.

Burns often works in conjunction with the Public Broadcasting Service
(PBS), which funds and airs much of his work. To see these techniques in
action, visit his page on the PBS website and watch a [short clip of his
biography of Jack Johnson](#) (1878--1946), the first Black American
heavyweight boxer to became world champion---in the height of the Jim
Crow era.

# Publish Your Work: Film Autobiography {#sect-00006}

Make a documentary of your own! Document the process of writing your
essay or select a meaningful moment in your life---an event, an
anniversary, an accomplishment, a disappointment---and create a 3--5
minute multimodal video about it, incorporating video, still images, and
text that explore the significance of the moment in your life. Post your
finished product to YouTube. [\#](#) lists resources you can use to
produce and publish your video, including ways to limit viewership and
address privacy concerns.

+--------------------------------------------------------------------+
| *Video Creation Software*                                          |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| *Name*               | *Notes*              | *Location*           |
+======================+======================+======================+
| Lightworks           | Best for beginners.  | [LWKS](#)            |
|                      | Includes stock       |                      |
|                      | images.              |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| VideoPad             | Open access and easy | [VideoPad](#)        |
|                      | to use. Limited      |                      |
|                      | functionality.       |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| HitFilm Express      | Somewhat advanced.   | [HitFilm](#)         |
|                      | Allows special       |                      |
|                      | effects. Must share  |                      |
|                      | status update on     |                      |
|                      | social media to use. |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| OpenShot             | For intermediate     | [OpenShot](#)        |
|                      | users.               |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| *YouTube Resources*                                                |
+---------------------------------------------+----------------------+
| *Description*                               | *Location*           |
+---------------------------------------------+----------------------+
| Upload videos to YouTube privately so that  | [YouTube](#)         |
| you control who sees them and when.         |                      |
+---------------------------------------------+----------------------+
| Set your YouTube audience to comply with    | [Channel Setting](#) |
| the Children's Online Privacy Protection    |                      |
| Act.                                        |                      |
+---------------------------------------------+----------------------+
| Set your YouTube video to be visible only   | [Sharing With a      |
| to your professor and classmates.           | Specific             |
|                                             | Audience](#)         |
+---------------------------------------------+----------------------+

: Resources for making a film autobiography {#table-00001}

A film autobiography about your experiences with writing and images can
help you consider the way you use images in discourse. It also serves as
good practice in thinking critically about your experiences and their
relation to both images and language. Finally, a film autobiography
allows you to communicate your experiences and reflections with others,
expanding their worldview as well as your own.
