m00114

5dd52da2-ff01-4ee7-a55f-ca3f9bd93d61

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

The term research is used widely and regularly and may have
different---sometimes contradictory---meanings. Therefore, it is
important to clarify what research is, why it is a key tool for academic
success, and how using research-based evidence can enhance a writer's
rhetorical abilities and effectiveness.

No matter what academic subjects you study, at some point you will need
to conduct research. Although research is an integral part of all
disciplines, even those primarily related to art or performance, the
product of the research will vary. Even if your coursework does not
require formal, documented research, it will, at minimum, include
regular research behaviors. Every day, whether deciding which movie to
watch or choosing a new technology product, everyone participates in
basic, informal research behaviors: a process of seeking information,
testing it against other forms of collected information, and analyzing
as much "data" as possible before making decisions or being persuaded.
Although more formal, the same process applies to academic writing. You
may be required to conduct research, gather evidence (data), and present
your ideas and findings in a range of genres.

Like all communication, conducting and citing research is rhetorically
situated and thus has a purpose, the reason or goal for the research; an
audience, the recipient of the research findings; a genre, the structure
of reported research; a stance, the position, or viewpoint, supported by
research; a context, the situation in which the research or subject
occurs; and a culture, the groups of people who share common beliefs and
lived experiences, reflected by the author, audience, and subject.
Furthermore, the researcher uses effective rhetorical strategies, such
as reasoning supported by evidence. Therefore, it is important to match
your research to the elements of the rhetorical situation, as indicated.
For example, for a political science course, you may find that current
unrest on campus regarding politics or race functions as a *context* for
conducting formal research (through surveys or interviews) on students'
responses to that unrest. Your *purpose* might be to provide evidence
that supports your *stance* in proposing a change of campus policies.
Your *audience* may include university administrators and student
representatives. Your *genre* may be a persuasive speech, an article in
the student newspaper, a poster, or a public service video. *Cultural
elements* include the unrest and its relation to the university
environment for both students and faculty. The supporting evidence is
the resulting data and analysis from the surveys or interviews. But
before you consider how to use evidence in reporting research, it is
important to understand the research process itself.

With a focus on the role of evidence collection in research, this
chapter presents methods for introducing research as evidence, examines
the genre and writing processes associated with argumentative research
papers, and addresses the use of unbiased language in creating and
reporting effective research.
