m00115

8a4c6240-5527-4e60-b9eb-67f976168a51

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Articulate how research evidence and sources are key rhetorical concepts
in presenting a position or an argument.

Locate and distinguish between primary and secondary research materials.

Implement methods and technologies commonly used for research and
communication within various fields.

The writing tasks for this chapter and the next two chapters are based
on argumentative research. However, not all researched evidence (data)
is presented in the same genre. You may need to gather evidence for a
poster, a performance, a story, an art exhibit, or even an architectural
design. Although the genre may vary, you usually will be required to
present a perspective, or viewpoint, about a debatable issue and
persuade readers to support the "validity of your viewpoint," as
discussed in [Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric](#).
Remember, too, that a debatable issue is one that has more than a single
perspective and is subject to disagreement.

# The Research Process {#sect-00002}

Although individual research processes are rhetorically situated, they
share some common aspects:

Interest.

The researcher has a genuine interest in the topic. It may be difficult
to fake curiosity, but it is possible to develop it. Some academic
assignments will allow you to pursue issues that are personally
important to you; others will require you to dive into the research
first and generate interest as you go.

Questions.

The researcher asks questions. At first, these questions are general.
However, as researchers gain more knowledge, the questions become more
sharply focused. No matter what your research assignment is, begin by
articulating questions, find out where the answers lead, and then ask
still more questions.

Answers.

The researcher seeks answers from people as well as from print and other
media. Research projects profit when you ask knowledgeable people, such
as librarians and other professionals, to help you answer questions or
point you in directions to find answers. Information about research is
covered more extensively in

Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information

and

Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and Documenting Sources

.

Field research.

The researcher conducts field research. Field research allows
researchers not only to ask questions of experts but also to observe and
experience directly. It allows researchers to generate original data. No
matter how much other people tell you, your knowledge increases through
personal observations. In some subject areas, field research is as
important as library or database research. This information is covered
more extensively in

Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information

.

Examination of texts.

The researcher examines texts. Consulting a broad range of texts---such
as magazines, brochures, newspapers, archives, blogs, videos,
documentaries, or peer-reviewed journals---is crucial in academic
research.

Evaluation of sources.

The researcher evaluates sources. As your research progresses, you will
double-check information to find out whether it is confirmed by more
than one source. In informal research, researchers evaluate sources to
ensure that the final decision is satisfactory. Similarly, in academic
research, researchers evaluate sources to ensure that the final product
is accurate and convincing. Previewed here, this information is covered
more extensively in

Research Process: Accessing and Recording Information

.

Writing.

The researcher writes. The writing during the research process can take
a range of forms: from notes during library, database, or field work; to
journal reflections on the research process; to drafts of the final
product. In practical research, writing helps researchers find,
remember, and explore information. In academic research, writing is even
more important because the results must be reported accurately and
thoroughly.

Testing and Experimentation.

The researcher tests and experiments. Because opinions vary on debatable
topics and because few research topics have correct or incorrect
answers, it is important to test and conduct experiments on possible
hypotheses or solutions.

Synthesis.

The researcher synthesizes. By combining information from various
sources, researchers support claims or arrive at new conclusions. When
synthesizing, researchers connect evidence and ideas, both original and
borrowed. Accumulating, sorting, and synthesizing information enables
researchers to consider what evidence to use in support of a thesis and
in what ways.

Presentation.

The researcher presents findings in an interesting, focused, and
well-documented product.

# Types of Research Evidence {#sect-00003}

Research evidence usually consists of data, which comes from borrowed
information that you use to develop your thesis and support your
organizational structure and reasoning. This evidence can take a range
of forms, depending on the type of research conducted, the audience, and
the genre for reporting the research.

## Primary Research Sources {#sect-00004}

Although precise definitions vary somewhat by discipline, primary data
sources are generally defined as firsthand accounts, such as texts or
other materials produced by someone drawing from direct experience or
observation. Primary source documents include, but are not limited to,
personal narratives and diaries; eyewitness accounts; interviews;
original documents such as treaties, official certificates, and
government documents detailing laws or acts; speeches; newspaper
coverage of events at the time they occurred; observations; and
experiments. Primary source data is, in other words, original and in
some way conducted or collected primarily by the researcher. [The
Research Process: Where to Look for Existing Sources](#) and [Compiling
Sources for an Annotated Bibliography](#) contain more information on
both primary and secondary sources.

## Secondary Research Sources {#sect-00005}

Secondary sources, on the other hand, are considered at least one step
removed from the experience. That is, they rely on sources other than
direct observation or firsthand experience. Secondary sources include,
but are not limited to, most books, articles online or in databases, and
textbooks (which are sometimes classified as tertiary sources because,
like encyclopedias and other reference works, their primary purpose
might be to summarize or otherwise condense information). [Secondary
sources](#) regularly cite and build upon primary sources to provide
perspective and analysis. Effective use of researched evidence usually
includes both primary and secondary sources. Works of history, for
example, draw on a large range of primary and secondary sources, citing,
analyzing, and synthesizing information to present as many perspectives
of a past event in as rich and nuanced a way as possible.

It is important to note that the distinction between primary and
secondary sources depends in part on their use: that is, the same
document can be both a primary source *and* a secondary source. For
example, if Scholar X wrote a biography about Artist Y, the biography
would be a secondary source about the artist and, at the same time, a
primary source about the scholar.
