m00116

7ba0ec4d-7234-4da6-ae5c-67f1a904b0a7

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify and explain key rhetorical concepts.

Analyze how authors make claims and support them with evidence in a
range of activities outside of academic writing.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

"I love doing the homework on recipes and traditions . . . \[I'm\]
excited to . . . read and research."
::::

Food writer, chef, and TV host Samin Nosrat (b. 1979) was born in San
Diego, California, to Iranian parents who, as followers of the Baha'i
faith, immigrated to the United States to avoid religious persecution in
their native country. When she was a student at the University of
California, Berkeley, Nosrat became interested in cooking after a dinner
at Berkeley's well-known Chez Panisse, the restaurant belonging to
award-winning chef, author, and food activist Alice Waters (b. 1944).
Indeed, Nosrat became so interested that she got a job bussing tables at
the restaurant several months later. After a year, she "moved up" to the
kitchen, where she became a cook, working with Chez Panisse chef Cal
Peternell.

Nosrat is well known for her cookbook *Salt, Fat, Acid, Heat: Mastering
the Elements of Good Cooking* (2017), which won the prestigious James
Beard Award in 2018 and also reached the *New York Times* best seller
list that year. In the book, Nosrat claims that "like a scholar in
search of primary sources," she wanted "to experience authentic versions
of the dishes" she loved. In addition to being a chef and writer, she
has hosted an award-winning Netflix docuseries based on her book and
until February 2021 was a regular columnist for *The New York Times
Magazine*.

The underlying thesis of Nosrat's *[Salt, Fat, Acid, Heat](#)* is that
one should trust their senses in the kitchen, building confidence and
developing the knowledge to gain this trust. Nosrat emphasizes an
intuitive, elemental approach to cooking. "Anyone can cook anything and
make it delicious," Nosrat claims in the book's introduction,
establishing that excellent cooking is based on skill in using and
balancing the four basic elements named in the title. She found solid
evidence for this stance in Japan, where the cuisine features salt; in
Italy, where the cuisine features fat; in Mexico, where the cuisine
features acid; and in California, where the cuisine features heat.
Nosrat explains these four elements in detail and supports her premise
with research, interviews, and internships with talented cooks in
different countries.

When talking about her television show, Nosrat says, "Good food around
the world is more similar than it is different." She considers how the
chemistry and the culture of cooking work together around the world to
create universally good food and, at the same time, create empathy and
common ground.

Nosrat's audience can thus discern a persuasive purpose to her research
into cooking. She argues that in addition to food, cooking is about
people, and she hopes that by eating the food of a particular culture,
readers and viewers will develop compassion for the people of that
culture, despite politics or history. Seeking answers to important
questions, Nosrat asks, "Does \[food\] really matter? Can food make a
difference?"

As she continues her mission of research and writing, Nosrat feels the
responsibility of her calling: to provide greater cross-cultural
understanding and to center minoritized voices and traditions. She wants
readers to feel safe inside her book, supported by the context she
provides and her sensitivity to culture.

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00003}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
