m00117

44e24222-747d-4f05-bd87-ebe98fee686d

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify key terms and characteristics of evidence-based research
writing.

Participate effectively in a continuing scholarly conversation by
synthesizing research and discussing it with others.

Identify and analyze genre conventions as shaped by purpose, culture,
and expectation.

Good writing satisfies audience expectations in genre, style, and
content. Similarly, careful research, conducted according to the scope
and method of each discipline, is a precondition of good research
writing. In the humanities, research usually focuses on texts,
individual ideas, speculations, insights, and imaginative connections.
On the other hand, research in the social and physical sciences tends to
focus on data and ideas that can be verified through observation,
measurement, and testing. However, regardless of differences in
disciplines and preferences of varying audiences, certain principles of
research, writing, and supporting a position hold true across the
curriculum.

# The Genre of Research: Joining Scholarly Conversations {#sect-00002}

Conducting research on topics about which you have limited knowledge can
be intimidating. To feel more comfortable with research, you can think
of it as participating in a scholarly conversation, with the
understanding that all knowledge on a particular subject is connected.
Even if you discover only a small amount of information on your topic,
the conversations around it may have begun long before you were born and
may continue beyond your lifetime. Your involvement with the topic is
your way of entering a conversation with other students and scholars at
this time, as you discuss and synthesize information. After you leave
the conversation, or finish your research, others are likely to pick it
up again.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

What you find through research helps you provide solid evidence that
empowers you to add productively to the conversation. Thinking of
research in this way means understanding the connections among your
topic, your course materials, and larger historical, social, political,
and economic contexts and themes. Understanding such connectedness
begins with choosing your topic and continues through all phases of your
research.

# Key Terms in Research Writing {#sect-00003}

These are key terms and characteristics of evidence-based research
writing:

Citation

.

When reporting research, writers use citations to acknowledge and give
credit for all borrowed materials. Citation also strengthens the
credibility, or ethos, of the researcher. Citations always have two
parts. Internal citations are short references that lead readers to more
detailed information about how to find the sources. External citations
are the entries listed, with publishing information, on the Works Cited
or References page of the paper. Formatting of both internal and
external citations is disciplinary specific. See the Handbook for
specific information about

MLA Documentation and Format

and

APA Documentation and Format

.

claim

.

Claims are the points you make in your report. They are based on and
supported by research and evidence.

Counterclaims

.

When it comes to research, the counterclaim is the writer's thoughtful
consideration and addressing of the other side's objections to claims
made or even to the topic itself. Counterclaims may need to be supported
by further research and evidence.

Evidence

.

Within the genre of research, evidence is either findings from original
research or, more often, borrowed information that helps you develop
your thesis and support your organizational structure and line of
reasoning.

Field research

.

Field research is basically primary research you conduct through
observation or experimentation. Depending on your research question, you
may need to seek answers by visiting museums or businesses, attending
concerts, conducting interviews, observing classrooms or professionals
at work, performing experiments, or following leads. Field research is
covered extensively in

Research Process: How to Create Sources

.

Research question

.

Your research question dictates your general line or lines of inquiry
that ultimately guide your research. In developing your research
question(s), you are narrowing the scope of your topic. Your research
question(s) will come from the purpose of your research, the audience of
your research product, and the genre for reporting your research.

Thesis

.

The thesis is the claim, position, or hypothesis by which you attempt to
answer your formulated research question(s).

Reasoning

.

Similar to an argumentative essay, the line of reasoning in a research
essay, report, or presentation is the organizational arrangement of the
supports and evidence that back up your thesis.

Topic

.

The topic is the general subject or content area of your research.
Strong topics are usually those that involve some controversy or debate.
Topics that are not debatable or have no nuanced perspectives do not
make for strong research questions or lines of inquiry.
