m00118

822afb4a-1eb4-45de-a7de-64cb88f7e923

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Analyze how writers use evidence in research writing.

Analyze the ways a writer incorporates sources into research writing,
while retaining their own voice.

Explain the use of headings as organizational tools in research writing.

Analyze how writers use evidence to address counterarguments when
writing a research essay.

# Introduction {#sect-00002}

In this argumentative research essay for a first-year composition class,
student Lily Tran creates a solid, focused argument and supports it with
researched evidence. Throughout the essay, she uses this evidence to
support cause-and-effect and problem-solution reasoning, make strong
appeals, and develop her ethos on the topic.

# Food as Change {#sect-00003}

For the human race to have a sustainable future, massive changes in the
way food is produced, processed, and distributed are necessary on a
global scale.

Purpose. *Lily Tran refers to what she sees as the general purpose for
writing this paper: the problem of current global practices in food
production, processing, and distribution. By presenting the "problem,"
she immediately prepares readers for her proposed solution.*

The required changes will affect nearly all aspects of life, including
not only world hunger but also health and welfare, land use and
habitats, water quality and availability, energy use and production,
greenhouse gas emissions and climate change, economics, and even
cultural and social values. These changes may not be popular, but they
are imperative. The human race must turn to sustainable food systems
that provide healthy diets with minimal environmental impact---and
starting now.

Thesis. *Leading up to this clear, declarative thesis statement are key
points on which Tran will expand later. In doing this, she presents some
foundational evidence that connects the problem to the proposed
solution.*

## THE COMING FOOD CRISIS {#sect-00004}

The world population has been rising exponentially in modern history.
From 1 billion in 1804, it doubled to approximately 2 billion by 1927,
then doubled again to approximately 4 billion in 1974. By 2019, it had
nearly doubled again, rising to 7.7 billion ("World Population by
Year"). It has been projected to reach nearly 10 billion by 2050
(Berners-Lee et al.). At the same time, the average life span also has
been increasing. These situations have led to severe stress on the
environment, particularly in the demands for food. It has been
estimated, for example, that by 2050, milk production will increase 58
percent and meat production 73 percent (Chai et al.).

Evidence. *In this first supporting paragraph, Tran uses numerical
evidence from several sources. This numerical data as evidence helps
establish the projection of population growth. By beginning with such
evidence, Tran underscores the severity of the situation.*

Theoretically, the planet can produce enough food for everyone, but
human activities have endangered this capability through unsustainable
practices. Currently, agriculture produces 10--23 percent of global
greenhouse gas emissions. Greenhouse gases---the most common being
carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, and water vapor--- trap heat in
the atmosphere, reradiate it, and send it back to Earth again. Heat
trapped in the atmosphere is a problem because it causes unnatural
global warming as well as air pollution, extreme weather conditions, and
respiratory diseases.

Audience. *With her audience in mind, Tran briefly explains the problem
of greenhouse gases and global warming.*

It has been estimated that global greenhouse gas emissions will increase
by as much as 150 percent by 2030 (Chai et al.). Transportation also has
a negative effect on the environment when foods are shipped around the
world. As Joseph Poore of the University of Oxford commented, "It's
essential to be mindful about everything we consume: air-transported
fruit and veg can create more greenhouse gas emissions per kilogram than
poultry meat, for example" (qtd. in Gray).

Transition. *By beginning this paragraph with her own transition of
ideas, Tran establishes control over the organization and development of
ideas. Thus, she retains her sources as supports and does not allow them
to dominate her essay.*

Current practices have affected the nutritional value of foods.
Concentrated animal-feeding operations, intended to increase production,
have had the side effect of decreasing nutritional content in animal
protein and increasing saturated fat. One study found that an
intensively raised chicken in 2017 contained only one-sixth of the
amount of omega-3 fatty acid, an essential nutrient, that was in a
chicken in 1970. Today the majority of calories in chicken come from fat
rather than protein (World Wildlife Fund).

Example. *By focusing on an example (chicken), Tran uses specific
research data to develop the nuance of the argument.*

Current policies such as government subsidies that divert food to
biofuels are counterproductive to the goal of achieving adequate global
nutrition. Some trade policies allow "dumping" of below-cost, subsidized
foods on developing countries that should instead be enabled to protect
their farmers and meet their own nutritional needs (Sierra Club). Too
often, agriculture's objectives are geared toward maximizing quantities
produced per acre rather than optimizing output of critical nutritional
needs and protection of the environment.

## AREAS OF CONCERN {#sect-00005}

### Hunger and Nutrition {#sect-00006}

Headings and Subheadings. *Throughout the essay, Tran has created
headings and subheadings to help organize her argument and clarify it
for readers.*

More than 820 million people around the world do not have enough to eat.
At the same time, about a third of all grains and almost two-thirds of
all soybeans, maize, and barley crops are fed to animals (Barnard).
According to the World Health Organization, 462 million adults are
underweight, 47 million children under 5 years of age are underweight
for their height, 14.3 million are severely underweight for their
height, and 144 million are stunted ("Malnutrition"). About 45 percent
of mortality among children under 5 is linked to undernutrition. These
deaths occur mainly in low- and middle-income countries where, in stark
contrast, the rate of childhood obesity is rising. Globally, 1.9 billion
adults and 38.3 million children are overweight or obese ("Obesity").
Undernutrition and obesity can be found in the same household, largely a
result of eating energy-dense foods that are high in fat and sugars. The
global impact of malnutrition, which includes both undernutrition and
obesity, has lasting developmental, economic, social, and medical
consequences.

In 2019, Berners-Lee et al. published the results of their quantitative
analysis of global and regional food supply. They determined that
significant changes are needed on four fronts:

Food production must be sufficient, in quantity and quality, to feed the
global population without unacceptable environmental impacts. Food
distribution must be sufficiently efficient so that a diverse range of
foods containing adequate nutrition is available to all, again without
unacceptable environmental impacts. Socio-economic conditions must be
sufficiently equitable so that all consumers can access the quantity and
range of foods needed for a healthy diet. Consumers need to be able to
make informed and rational choices so that they consume a healthy and
environmentally sustainable diet (10).

Block Quote. *The writer has chosen to present important evidence as a
direct quotation, using the correct format for direct quotations longer
than four lines. See Section [Editing Focus: Integrating Sources and
Quotations](#) for more information about block quotes.*

Among their findings, they singled out, in particular, the practice of
using human-edible crops to produce meat, dairy, and fish for the human
table. Currently 34 percent of human-edible crops are fed to animals, a
practice that reduces calorie and protein supplies. They state in their
report, "If society continues on a 'business-as-usual' dietary
trajectory, a 119% increase in edible crops grown will be required by
2050" (1). Future food production and distribution must be transformed
into systems that are nutritionally adequate, environmentally sound, and
economically affordable.

### Land and Water Use {#sect-00007}

Agriculture occupies 40 percent of Earth's ice-free land mass (Barnard).
While the net area used for producing food has been fairly constant
since the mid-20th century, the locations have shifted significantly.
Temperate regions of North America, Europe, and Russia have lost
agricultural land to other uses, while in the tropics, agricultural land
has expanded, mainly as a result of clearing forests and burning biomass
(Willett et al.). Seventy percent of the rainforest that has been cut
down is being used to graze livestock (Münter). Agricultural use of
water is of critical concern both quantitatively and qualitatively.
Agriculture accounts for about 70 percent of freshwater use, making it
"the world's largest water-consuming sector" (Barnard). Meat, dairy, and
egg production causes water pollution, as liquid wastes flow into rivers
and to the ocean (World Wildlife Fund and Knorr Foods). According to the
Hertwich et al., "the impacts related to these activities are unlikely
to be reduced, but rather enhanced, in a business-as-usual scenario for
the future" (13).

Statistical Data. *To develop her points related to land and water use,
Tran presents specific statistical data throughout this section. Notice
that she has chosen only the needed words of these key points to ensure
that she controls the development of the supporting point and does not
overuse borrowed source material.*

Defining Terms. *Aware of her audience, Tran defines* monocropping*, a
term that may be unfamiliar.*

Earth's resources and ability to absorb pollution are limited, and many
current agricultural practices undermine these capacities. Among these
unsustainable practices are monocropping \[growing a single crop year
after year on the same land\], concentrated animal-feeding operations,
and overdependence on manufactured pesticides and fertilizers
(Hamilton). Such practices deplete the soil, dramatically increase
energy use, reduce pollinator populations, and lead to the collapse of
resource supplies. One study found that producing one gram of beef for
human consumption requires 42 times more land, 2 times more water, and 4
times more nitrogen than staple crops. It also creates 3 times more
greenhouse gas emissions (Chai et al.). The EAT--*Lancet* Commission
calls for "halting expansion of new agricultural land at the expense of
natural ecosystems . . . strict protections on intact ecosystems,
suspending concessions for logging in protected areas, or conversion of
remaining intact ecosystems, particularly peatlands and forest areas"
(Willett et al. 481). The Commission also calls for land-use zoning,
regulations prohibiting land clearing, and incentives for protecting
natural areas, including forests.

Synthesis. *The paragraphs above and below this comment show how Tran
has synthesized content from several sources to help establish and
reinforce key supports of her essay*.

### Greenhouse Gas and Climate Change {#sect-00008}

Climate change is heavily affected by two factors: greenhouse gas
emissions and carbon sequestration. In nature, the two remain in
balance; for example, most animals exhale carbon dioxide, and most
plants capture carbon dioxide. Carbon is also captured, or sequestered,
by soil and water, especially oceans, in what are called "sinks." Human
activities have skewed this balance over the past two centuries. The
shift in land use, which exploits land, water, and fossil energy, has
caused increased greenhouse-gas emissions, which in turn accelerate
climate change.

Global food systems are threatened by climate change because farmers
depend on relatively stable climate systems to plan for production and
harvest. Yet food production is responsible for up to 30 percent of
greenhouse gas emissions (Barnard). While soil can be a highly effective
means of carbon sequestration, agricultural soils have lost much of
their effectiveness from overgrazing, erosion, overuse of chemical
fertilizer, and excess tilling. Hamilton reports that the world's
cultivated and grazed soils have lost 50 to 70 percent of their ability
to accumulate and store carbon. As a result, "billions of tons of carbon
have been released into the atmosphere."

Direct Quotation and Paraphrase. *While Tran has paraphrased some
content of this source borrowing, because of the specificity and impact
of the number--- "billions of tons of carbon"---she has chosen to use
the author's original words. As she has done elsewhere in the essay, she
has indicated these as directly borrowed words by placing them within
quotation marks. See Section 12.5 for more about paraphrasing.*

While carbon sequestration has been falling, greenhouse gas emissions
have been increasing as a result of the production, transport,
processing, storage, waste disposal, and other life stages of food
production. Agriculture alone is responsible for fully 10 to 12 percent
of global emissions, and that figure is estimated to rise by up to 150
percent of current levels by 2030 (Chai et al.). Münter reports that
"more greenhouse gas emissions are produced by growing livestock for
meat than all the planes, trains, ships, cars, trucks, and all forms of
fossil fuel-based transportation combined" (5). Additional greenhouse
gases, methane and nitrous oxide, are produced by the decomposition of
organic wastes. Methane has 25 times and nitrous oxide has nearly 300
times the global warming potential of carbon dioxide (Curnow).
Agricultural and food production systems must be reformed to shift
agriculture from greenhouse gas source to sink.

### Social and Cultural Values {#sect-00009}

As the Sierra Club has pointed out, agriculture is inherently cultural:
all systems of food production have "the capacity to generate . . .
economic benefits and ecological capital" as well as "a sense of meaning
and connection to natural resources." Yet this connection is more
evident in some cultures and less so in others. Wealthy countries built
on a consumer culture emphasize excess consumption. One result of this
attitude is that in 2014, Americans discarded the equivalent of \$165
billion worth of food. Much of this waste ended up rotting in landfills,
comprised the single largest component of U.S. municipal solid waste,
and contributed a substantial portion of U.S. methane emissions (Sierra
Club). In low- and middle-income countries, food waste tends to occur in
early production stages because of poor scheduling of harvests, improper
handling of produce, or lack of market access (Willett et al.). The
recent "America First" philosophy has encouraged prioritizing the
economic welfare of one nation to the detriment of global welfare and
sustainability.

Synthesis and Response to Claims. *Here, as in subsequent sections,
while still relying heavily on facts and content from borrowed sources,
Tran provides her synthesized understanding of the information by
responding to key points.*

In response to claims that a vegetarian diet is a necessary component of
sustainable food production and consumption, Lusk and Norwood determined
the importance of meat in a consumer's diet. Their study indicated that
meat is the most valuable food category to consumers, and "humans derive
great pleasure from consuming beef, pork, and poultry" (120). Currently
only 4 percent of Americans are vegetarians, and it would be difficult
to convince consumers to change their eating habits. Purdy adds "there's
the issue of philosophy. A lot of vegans aren't in the business of
avoiding animal products for the sake of land sustainability. Many would
prefer to just leave animal husbandry out of food altogether."

At the same time, consumers expect ready availability of the foods they
desire, regardless of health implications or sustainability of sources.
Unhealthy and unsustainable foods are heavily marketed. Out-of-season
produce is imported year-round, increasing carbon emissions from air
transportation. Highly processed and packaged convenience foods are
nutritionally inferior and waste both energy and packaging materials.
Serving sizes are larger than necessary, contributing to overconsumption
and obesity. Snack food vending machines are ubiquitous in schools and
public buildings. What is needed is a widespread attitude shift toward
reducing waste, choosing local fruits and vegetables that are in season,
and paying attention to how foods are grown and transported.

Thesis Restated. *Restating her thesis, Tran ends this section by
advocating for a change in attitude to bring about sustainability.*

## DISSENTING OPINIONS {#sect-00010}

**Counterclaims*.* *Tran uses equally strong research to present the
counterargument. Presenting both sides by addressing objections is
important in constructing a clear, well-reasoned argument. Writers
should use as much rigor in finding research-based evidence to counter
the opposition as they do to develop their argument.*

Transformation of the food production system faces resistance for a
number of reasons, most of which dispute the need for plant-based diets.
Historically, meat has been considered integral to athletes' diets and
thus has caused many consumers to believe meat is necessary for a
healthy diet. Lynch et al. examined the impact of plant-based diets on
human physical health, environmental sustainability, and exercise
performance capacity. The results show "it is unlikely that plant-based
diets provide advantages, but do not suffer from disadvantages, compared
to omnivorous diets for strength, anaerobic, or aerobic exercise
performance" (1).

A second objection addresses the claim that land use for animal-based
food production contributes to pollution and greenhouse gas emissions
and is inefficient in terms of nutrient delivery. Berners-Lee et al.
point out that animal nutrition from grass, pasture, and silage comes
partially from land that cannot be used for other purposes, such as
producing food directly edible by humans or for other ecosystem services
such as biofuel production. Consequently, nutritional losses from such
land use do not fully translate into losses of human-available nutrients
(3).

Paraphrase. *Tran has paraphrased the information as support. Though she
still cites the source, she has changed the words to her own, most
likely to condense a larger amount of original text or to make it more
accessible.*

While this objection may be correct, it does not address the fact that
natural carbon sinks are being destroyed to increase agricultural land
and, therefore, increase greenhouse gas emissions into the atmosphere.

Another significant dissenting opinion is that transforming food
production will place hardships on farmers and others employed in the
food industry. Farmers and ranchers make a major investment in their own
operations. At the same time, they support jobs in related industries,
as consumers of farm machinery, customers at local businesses, and
suppliers for other industries such as food processing (Schulz). Sparks
reports that "livestock farmers are being unfairly 'demonized' by vegans
and environmental advocates" and argues that while farming includes both
costs and benefits, the costs receive much more attention than the
benefits.

## FUTURE GENERATIONS {#sect-00011}

The EAT--*Lancet* Commission calls for a transformation in the global
food system, implementing different core processes and feedback. This
transformation will not happen unless there is "widespread,
multi-sector, multilevel action to change what food is eaten, how it is
produced, and its effects on the environment and health, while providing
healthy diets for the global population" (Willett et al. 476). System
changes will require global efforts coordinated across all levels and
will require governments, the private sector, and civil society to share
a common vision and goals. Scientific modeling indicates 10 billion
people could indeed be fed a healthy and sustainable diet.

Conclusion. *While still using research-based sources as evidence in the
concluding section, Tran finishes with her own words, restating her
thesis.*

For the human race to have a sustainable future, massive changes in the
way food is produced, processed, and distributed are necessary on a
global scale. The required changes will affect nearly all aspects of
life, including not only world hunger but also health and welfare, land
use and habitats, water quality and availability, energy use and
production, greenhouse gas emissions and climate change, economics, and
even cultural and social values. These changes may not be popular, but
they are imperative. They are also achievable. The human race must turn
to sustainable food systems that provide healthy diets with minimal
environmental impact, starting now.

Sources. *Note two important aspects of the sources chosen: 1) They
represent a range of perspectives, and 2) They are all quite current.
When exploring a contemporary topic, it is important to avoid research
that is out of date.*

## Works Cited {#sect-00012}

Barnard, Neal. "How Eating More Plants Can Save Lives and the Planet."
*Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine*, 24 Jan. 2019,
www.pcrm.org/news/blog/how-eating-more-plants-can-save-lives-and-planet.
Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Berners-Lee, M., et al. "Current Global Food Production Is Sufficient to
Meet Human Nutritional Needs in 2050 Provided There Is Radical Societal
Adaptation." *Elementa: Science of the Anthropocene*, vol. 6, no. 52,
2018, doi:10.1525/elementa.310. Accessed 7 Dec. 2020.

Chai, Bingli Clark, et al. "Which Diet Has the Least Environmental
Impact on Our Planet? A Systematic Review of Vegan, Vegetarian and
Omnivorous Diets." *Sustainability*, vol. 11, no. 15, 2019,
doi:10.3390/su11154110. Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Curnow, Mandy. "Managing Manure to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions."
Government of Western Australia, Department of Primary Industries and
Regional Development, 2 Nov. 2020,
www.agric.wa.gov.au/climate-change/managing-manure-reduce-greenhouse-gas-emissions.
Accessed 9 Dec. 2020.

Gray, Richard. "Why the Vegan Diet Is Not Always Green." *BBC*, 13 Feb.
2020,
www.bbc.com/future/article/20200211-why-the-vegan-diet-is-not-always-green.
Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Hamilton, Bruce. "Food and Our Climate." Sierra Club, 2014,
www.sierraclub.org/compass/2014/10/food-and-our-climate. Accessed 6 Dec.
2020.

Hertwich. Edgar G., et al. *Assessing the Environmental Impacts of
Consumption and Production.* United Nations Environment Programme, 2010,
www.resourcepanel.org/reports/assessing-environmental-impacts-consumption-and-production.

Lusk, Jayson L., and F. Bailey Norwood. "Some Economic Benefits and
Costs of Vegetarianism." *Agricultural and Resource Economics Review*,
vol. 38, no. 2, 2009, pp. 109-24, doi: 10.1017/S1068280500003142.
Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Lynch Heidi, et al. "Plant-Based Diets: Considerations for Environmental
Impact, Protein Quality, and Exercise Performance." *Nutrients,* vol.
10, no. 12, 2018, doi:10.3390/nu10121841. Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Münter, Leilani. "Why a Plant-Based Diet Will Save the World." *Health
and the Environment.* Disruptive Women in Health Care & the United
States Environmental Protection Agency, 2012,
archive.epa.gov/womenandgirls/web/pdf/1016healththeenvironmentebook.pdf.

Purdy, Chase. "Being Vegan Isn't as Good for Humanity as You Think."
*Quartz*, 4 Aug. 2016,
qz.com/749443/being-vegan-isnt-as-environmentally-friendly-as-you-think/.
Accessed 7 Dec. 2020.

Schulz, Lee. "Would a Sudden Loss of the Meat and Dairy Industry, and
All the Ripple Effects, Destroy the Economy?" Iowa State U Department of
Economics, www.econ.iastate.edu/node/691. Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Sierra Club. "Agriculture and Food." Sierra Club, 28 Feb. 2015,
www.sierraclub.org/policy/agriculture/food. Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Sparks, Hannah. "Veganism Won't Save the World from Environmental Ruin,
Researchers Warn." *New York Post*, 29 Nov. 2019,
nypost.com/2019/11/29/veganism-wont-save-the-world-from-environmental-ruin-researchers-warn/.
Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

Willett, Walter, et al. "Food in the Anthropocene: The EAT--*Lancet*
Commission on Healthy Diets from Sustainable Food Systems." *The
Lancet,* vol. 393, no. 10170, 2019. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31788-4.
Accessed 6 Dec. 2020.

World Health Organization. "Malnutrition." World Health Organization, 1
Apr. 2020, www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/malnutrition.
Accessed 8 Dec. 2020.

World Health Organization. "Obesity and Overweight." World Health
Organization, 1 Apr. 2020,
www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/obesity-and-overweight.
Accessed 8 Dec. 2020.

World Wildlife Fund. *Appetite for Destruction: Summary Report.* World
Wildlife Fund, 2017,
www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/files/2017-10/WWF_AppetiteForDestruction_Summary_Report_SignOff.pdf.

World Wildlife Fund and Knorr Foods. *Future Fifty Foods.* World
Wildlife Fund, 2019,
www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/files/2019-02/Knorr_Future_50_Report_FINAL_Online.pdf.

"World Population by Year." *Worldometer*,
www.worldometers.info/world-population/world-population-by-year/.
Accessed 8 Dec. 2020.

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00013}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
