m00119

69275075-b68a-4d08-b24f-2202f6721836

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify characteristics of and formulate a strong thesis.

Evaluate sources to decide what to include in a research essay.

Synthesize information from outside sources with your own ideas in
research writing while retaining a writerly voice.

Distinguish between a quotation, summary, and paraphrase and use each
appropriately.

Draft an argumentative research essay.

Experience the collaborative and social aspects of writing processes.

Give and act on productive feedback to works in progress.

With a clearer understanding of how to work with sources to support and
develop your position, you are just about ready to join the conversation
and begin a research writing project of your own. The rest of this
chapter will guide you through the process.

# Summary of Assignment {#sect-00002}

For this assignment, you will write an argumentative research essay in
which you take a position on a food-based topic. The objective in
developing this essay is to explore a topic, concept, or question with
which you may be unfamiliar or about which you want to know more. As a
first step, creating a list of possible topics will allow you to
consider the range of possibilities. Consider the following, for
example:

Health aspects of caffeine or alcohol

Vegetarian diets

Eating disorders

Food shortages

School lunches

Next, formulating a research question will help you consider the scope
of your essay by providing guidelines to follow in your research.
Consider the following, for example:

Is the long-term but limited consumption of caffeine or alcohol (red
wine, for example) healthy or unhealthy for the body? Why?

What are the environmental benefits of a vegetarian diet?

What are the causes of eating disorders, and how can they be
circumvented?

What can be done to alleviate food shortages in a particular country?

What is the school's responsibility in providing students with
nutrition?

As you explore possible topics and develop your focus for the paper,
consider significant points of contention---that is, their debatable
nature: perhaps an important viewpoint that has not been widely
addressed or a perspective that has not adequately been explored. Your
thesis-driven essay should follow these criteria:

10--12 pages, double-spaced, 12-point font (standard one-inch margins)

8--10 sources (reflecting a range of primary and secondary sources, both
print and digital)

MLA or APA documentation (in-text and end-of-text citation) as assigned
by your instructor

You will synthesize the information you discover during your research to
make connections about the potential significance of your topic for your
audience and for further inquiry. You will develop your essay on the
basis of thorough research of multiple sources and full analysis of your
findings. Use sources as evidence to support, contradict, or expand your
original ideas or thinking. Be sure to include extensive analysis or
evaluation regarding your research question.

Another Lens 1. It can be challenging to come up with topics for your
research paper; however, because research can often be a collaborative
activity (several people researching different aspects of a topic to
collaboratively write a report), brainstorming possible topics with
others can help you get started.

To collaborate, form a small group, and list five possible topics on a
sheet of paper or your laptop. Leave space under each topic for
comments, ideas, and questions. After everyone has completed their list
of topics, either move the paper or rotate seats every 10 minutes to
allow group members to provide comments, ideas, and questions for all
topic lists. If four people are in your group, you would provide
comments, ideas, and question for three other group members, as you too
will receive the same.

Another Lens 2. Be as creative and inclusive as possible when thinking
about topics and data source materials. Making a list of all possible
nontraditional sources that could inform your topic may help you provide
another lens. Or consider the varying viewpoints from which to explore
your topic. While the [Annotated Student Sample](#) includes a range of
traditionally academic sources, it might be interesting to consider
possible nontraditional sources for researching a food- and
culture-based topic. For example, consider these as primary sources:
cookbooks, food blogs, or cultural festivals at which foods are
included. If possible, consider doing field research, such as conducting
interviews or observing professionals on site. As you choose your topic
and begin your research process, keep an open mind about ways to use a
variety of sources to approach your topic in different ways.

Another Lens 3. Consider working in pairs in which each partner
researches and writes on an opposing view of a single debatable issue.
After researching and writing the papers as instructed, partners can set
up a debate or panel discussion in which each presents their views on
the subject, offering supporting evidence from their papers. Partners
may want to enhance their presentations with PowerPoint or other media,
including graphics, other visuals, or even sound, once again using or
building further on researched evidence.

# Thesis Frames {#sect-00003}

The most specific way to define the scope and focus of your research
paper---and, as a writer, to control the thought and creativity of
it---is through the *position* you take on the topic: your stance, or
thesis. A thesis statement is often (though not always) a single, clear,
and concise sentence that reveals your stance early in the essay. Keep
in mind, though, that it is *not* the essay question restated, a topic
statement, an assertion of fact, or a step-by-step writing plan. Strong
academic writing generally shows the thesis in the introductory section
and then returns to it throughout, allowing readers to understand the
writer's purpose and stance. To use a travel analogy, your thesis tells
readers where you are going and why the journey matters.

As you are composing your essay, the thesis serves as a touchstone to
help you determine what material is pertinent. Keeping your thesis in
mind as you draft is important to ensure that your reasoning and
supporting evidence are focused and relevant. A strong thesis also
provides a way to measure how successful you have been in achieving your
purpose---in travel terms again, it lets you judge whether you have
reached your destination and explained the journey's meaning. See
[Writing Process: Thinking Critically About Rhetoric](#) for more
information about thesis statements.

Review the [Annotated Student Sample](#) to follow the way Lily Tran
presents her thesis: "The human race must turn to sustainable food
systems that provide healthy diets with minimal environmental impact,
starting now." *What works? What doesn't? What can you learn from her
for your own writing?*

Remember that as your topic and ideas develop, you may need to revisit
your thesis statement. One good practice in writing is to revisit the
thesis after completing your draft to ensure the thesis reflects the
content and focus of your paper. If it does not align with the content,
readers may think that you set yourself one task but completed another.
If this disconnect occurs, it's time to revise the thesis or content
accordingly.

To develop a working thesis for your argumentative research paper, try
using one of these frames. You may change the phrasing as needed to
support your ideas.

Because \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, \[someone\] should \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ saves \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, reduces \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, and
saves \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The lack of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ shows \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ influences \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and by extension
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ accurately (inaccurately) portrays \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
because \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ is a result of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, and
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

Although some argue that \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, a close examination shows
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ prove that \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

# Working with Sources {#sect-00004}

When writing an argumentative research essay, you will need to draw on
*other* people's research to support *your* original thinking. Such a
proposition may seem complicated and even contradictory.

  *Your argumentative research essay writing assignment may require that you ...*                   *While also ...*
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  develop a topic based on what has already been said and written                                   writing something new and original.
  rely on experts' and authorities' opinions and facts to support your ideas                        engaging with the borrowed materials by improving upon or disagreeing with those same opinions.
  attribute credit meticulously to previous researchers                                             finding a way to develop your own significant contribution.
  adapt your language to fit the discipline of your topic by building upon what you hear and read   finding a way to incorporate your own words and your own voice.

You can meet these writing requirements through planning and
organization. The following information is designed to help you simplify
the steps.

## Don't Skip the Outline {#sect-00005}

Take the time to outline each body paragraph. Compose a working topic
sentence, and choose a reasoning strategy or strategies. Then, in a
paragraph outline organizer like the one presented in [\#](#), list the
researched evidence you will use in the paragraph to support your topic
sentence and related thesis. Model your entry on the first entry by Lily
Tran. Be sure to include the in-text citation in the evidence column.
Add more rows as needed.

+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| *Working Thesis:* The human race must turn to sustainable food     |
| systems that provide healthy diets with minimal environmental      |
| impact, starting now.                                              |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| *Topic Sentence*     | *Reasoning Strategy* | *Supporting          |
|                      |                      | Researched Evidence* |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Global food systems  | Cause and effect     | Yet food production  |
| are threatened by    |                      | is responsible for   |
| climate change       |                      | up to 30 percent of  |
| because farmers      |                      | greenhouse gas       |
| depend on relatively |                      | emissions (Barnard). |
| stable climate       |                      |                      |
| systems to plan for  |                      |                      |
| production and       |                      |                      |
| harvest.             |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

: Paragraph outline organizer {#table-00002}

## Summary vs. Synthesis {#sect-00006}

In a research essay, you may incorporate borrowed material through
synthesis, summary, quotation, or paraphrase. Because research writing
is more than cutting and pasting together other people's ideas, good
writers synthesize the material they use by looking for connections
among sources to develop their own arguments. Summary---or a brief
review of main points---is a necessary foundation for synthesis, but it
is important to avoid constructing an essay simply on a series of
summaries. Part of developing your own voice and control over your essay
stems from your decision about which supports you use and why. You do
not want sources to override your ideas. Remember, sources provide
evidence for *your* thesis.

[\#](#) shows some key differences between summary and synthesis:

  *Summary*                                    *Synthesis*
  -------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------
  Demonstrates comprehension/understanding     Demonstrates critical/creative thinking and insight
  Collects information                         Compares/contrasts information
  Restates key points                          Interprets key points to make new meaning
  Looks within a text                          Looks for connections/relationships between texts
  Treats sources as distinct entities          Combines bits and pieces of sources for specific purpose
  Provides overview of content                 Interprets content
  Requires basic reading and thinking skills   Requires complex reading and thinking skills

  : Summary vs. synthesis {#table-00003}

Notice how Lily Tran synthesizes information in her work, combining
sources to respond to a claim and adding her own views in the second
paragraph:

In response to claims that a vegetarian diet is a necessary component of
sustainable food production and consumption, Lusk and Norwood determined
the importance of meat in a consumer's diet. Their study indicated that
meat is the most valuable food category to consumers, and "humans derive
great pleasure from consuming beef, pork, and poultry" (120). Currently
only 4 percent of Americans are vegetarians, and it would be difficult
to convince consumers to change their eating habits. Purdy adds "there's
the issue of philosophy. A lot of vegans aren't in the business of
avoiding animal products for the sake of land sustainability. Many would
prefer to just leave animal husbandry out of food altogether."

At the same time, consumers expect ready availability of the foods they
desire, regardless of health implications or sustainability of sources.
Unhealthy and unsustainable foods are heavily marketed. Out-of-season
produce is imported year-round, increasing carbon emissions from air
transportation. Highly processed and packaged convenience foods are
nutritionally inferior and waste both energy and packaging materials.
Serving sizes are larger than necessary, contributing to overconsumption
and obesity. Snack food vending machines are ubiquitous in schools and
public buildings. What is needed is a widespread attitude shift toward
reducing waste, choosing local fruits and vegetables that are in season,
and paying attention to how foods are grown and transported.

## Quoting vs. Paraphrasing {#sect-00007}

One of the most common ways to use sources is by incorporating other
people's words into your work. Students who are unsure about their
writing sometimes overuse quotations, creating a patchwork essay of
other people's voices, because they may lack confidence about using
their own words. However, one key point to remember is not to allow your
sources to drown out your own voice. As a writer, you can avoid
overreliance on others' words by being strategic about the quotations
you include and by incorporating your own explanations and analysis for
the quotations that you do include. Always explain or analyze your
quotations; they do not speak for themselves.

For example, Lily Tran does this kind of analysis in the following
paragraph. In the first three sentences, she paraphrases and quotes from
the source. In the final sentence, she looks at the implications and
relates the evidence to her thesis.

Among their findings, they singled out, in particular, the practice of
using human-edible crops to produce meat, dairy, and fish for the human
table. Currently 34 percent of human-edible crops are fed to animals, a
practice that reduces calorie and protein supplies. They state in their
report, "If society continues on a 'business-as-usual' dietary
trajectory, a 119% increase in edible crops grown will be required by
2050" (1). Future food production and distribution must be transformed
into systems that are nutritionally adequate, environmentally sound, and
economically affordable.

A crucial skill you will develop as you practice writing is the ability
to judge when to quote directly and when to paraphrase. You have no
doubt used direct quotations in your writing, repeating someone else's
words verbatim within your paper and placing them within quotation
marks, "like this." Another way to incorporate borrowed ideas into your
writing is to paraphrase them, or restate them in your own words. If the
ideas you want to borrow are particularly long, complicated, or filled
with jargon, consider paraphrasing for brevity or clarity. Paraphrasing
also allows you to maintain your own voice, keeping the writing style
and language as consistent as possible---a benefit especially when you
draw on multiple sources at once.

[\#](#) reviews the differences between quoting and paraphrasing and
when to use each.

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| *Quotation*                       | *Paraphrase*                      |
+===================================+===================================+
| The borrowing must be identical   | The idea or concept borrowed from |
| to the original, comprising a     | a passage is rephrased in your    |
| narrow segment of the source. The | own words. A paraphrase must be   |
| quoted material must match the    | attributed to the original        |
| source document word for word and | source. Paraphrased material may  |
| must be attributed to the         | (or may not) be shorter than the  |
| original author.                  | original passage, depending on    |
|                                   | the text. If any language used is |
|                                   | the same as the language of the   |
|                                   | original source, then you are     |
|                                   | quoting, not paraphrasing. It is  |
|                                   | sometimes necessary in a          |
|                                   | paraphrase to use words directly  |
|                                   | from the borrowed material to     |
|                                   | account for technical or          |
|                                   | discipline-specific language. In  |
|                                   | such instances, place the         |
|                                   | directly quoted words within      |
|                                   | quotation marks.                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| *Use a quotation ...*             | *Use a paraphrase ...*            |
|                                   |                                   |
| to support your definition of a   | if a quotation would break the    |
| new or unfamiliar term or phrase  | flow of your paper (Too many      |
| when you want to distance         | quotations can make an essay      |
| yourself from the original source | sound choppy and difficult to     |
| by quoting it to make clear that  | follow.) to communicate           |
| the statement is not your own to  | statistics and numerical data     |
| show that an expert or authority  | when combining information from a |
| supports your position to provide | source with your own analysis or  |
| factual evidence for a claim to   | other data (synthesizing) when    |
| include historically significant  | what you want from your source is |
| language when a source presents   | the idea*,* not the language that |
| an idea in a particularly         | expresses it if you can state the |
| striking, moving, or unique way   | point of the material more        |
| to serve as a passage for         | succinctly by eliminating         |
| analysis, comment, or critique;   | irrelevant information and not    |
| for example, to set out a         | alter the meaning of the passage  |
| position with which you intend to | to explain or simplify a passage  |
| agree or disagree                 | that may be difficult to          |
|                                   | understand                        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

: When to quote and when to paraphrase {#table-00004}

Although quoting can be more straightforward, consider these suggestions
when paraphrasing:

Focus on ideas and on understanding the paper or passage as a whole
rather than skimming for specific phrases.

Put the original text aside when you write so that it doesn't overly
influence you.

Restructure the idea to reflect the way

your

brain works.

Change the words so that the paraphrase reflects your language and tone.
Think about how you would explain the idea to someone unfamiliar with
your subject (your mother, your roommate, your sister).

Here is an example of how Lily Tran combines paraphrase and quotation:

Global food systems are threatened by climate change because farmers
depend on relatively stable climate systems to plan for production and
harvest. Yet food production is responsible for up to 30 percent of
greenhouse gas emissions (Barnard). While soil can be a highly effective
means of carbon sequestration, agricultural soils have lost much of
their effectiveness from overgrazing, erosion, overuse of chemical
fertilizer, and excess tilling. Hamilton reports that the world's
cultivated and grazed soils have lost 50 to 70 percent of their ability
to accumulate and store carbon. As a result, "billions of tons of carbon
have been released into the atmosphere."

For more information on quoting, summarizing, and paraphrasing, visit
[Purdue University's Online Writing Lab (OWL)](#).

## Opening and Closing {#sect-00008}

Lead your argumentative research essay with your best punch. Make your
opening so strong your reader feels compelled to continue. Make your
closing so memorable your reader can't forget it. Because readers pay
special attention to openings and closings, make these sections work for
you. Start with a title and lead paragraph that grab readers' attention
and alert them to what is to come. End with closings that sum up and
reinforce where readers have been. Choose from the menu of options
presented in [\#](#) as you draft your essay. You may want to write more
than one opening and closing and then ask your peer conference partner
to give feedback about their preference and why they have that
preference.

+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| *Opening Strategies*             | *Closing Strategies*             |
+==================================+==================================+
| Describe a related conflict.     | Provide the answer to your       |
|                                  | research question.               |
| Explain the evolution of your    |                                  |
| thesis.                          | Return to the scene set by the   |
|                                  | opening.                         |
| Provide a related anecdote.      |                                  |
|                                  | Resolve the problem you have     |
| Start with a sensory detail.     | explored.                        |
|                                  |                                  |
| Introduce a related quotation.   | Make a recommendation or a call  |
|                                  | to action.                       |
| Shock readers with a statistic.  |                                  |
|                                  | Speculate about the future with  |
| Ask a rhetorical question.       | regard to the issue.             |
|                                  |                                  |
| Present the chronology of the    | Revisit your thesis.             |
| issue.                           |                                  |
|                                  | Leave readers with an insightful |
| End with your thesis.            | thought to ponder.               |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

: Writing menu {#table-00005}

Look again at the way Lily Tran begins her essay by explaining the
evolution of her thesis. *Is it effective in grabbing your attention?
Why or why not? What are some other strategies that she might have
used?*

For the human race to have a sustainable future, massive changes in the
way food is produced, processed, and distributed are necessary on a
global scale. The required changes will affect nearly all aspects of
life, including not only world hunger but also health and welfare, land
use and habitats, water quality and availability, energy use and
production, greenhouse gas emissions and climate change, economics, and
even cultural and social values. These changes may not be popular, but
they are imperative. The human race must turn to sustainable food
systems that provide healthy diets with minimal environmental impact,
starting now.

Now look again at the way Lily Tran ends her essay by revisiting her
thesis. *Is it effective in leaving you with something to think about?
Why or why not? What are some other strategies that she might have
used?*

For the human race to have a sustainable future, massive changes in the
way food is produced, processed, and distributed are necessary on a
global scale. The required changes will affect nearly all aspects of
life, including not only world hunger but also health and welfare, land
use and habitats, water quality and availability, energy use and
production, greenhouse gas emissions and climate change, economics, and
even cultural and social values. These changes may not be popular, but
they are imperative. They are also achievable. The human race must turn
to sustainable food systems that provide healthy diets with minimal
environmental impact, starting now.

## Responding to Counterarguments {#sect-00009}

The final element of your argumentative research essay is a response to
counterarguments, or others' objections. To establish your credibility
on the subject, you need to acknowledge and address the most important
arguments against your thesis. Look again at Lily Tran's response to a
counterargument, which she acknowledges and then addresses. *Does she
address the counterargument fully? What could she add to the paragraph
to address the counterargument more fully and forcefully?*

A second objection addresses the claim that land use for animal-based
food production contributes to pollution and greenhouse gas emissions
and is inefficient in terms of nutrient delivery. Berners-Lee et al.
point out that animal nutrition from grass, pasture, and silage comes
partially from land that cannot be used for other purposes, such as
producing food directly edible by humans or for other ecosystem services
such as biofuel production. Consequently, nutritional losses from such
land use do not fully translate into losses of human-available
nutrients.

Use a graphic organizer like [\#](#) to plan your response to important
arguments against your thesis, and consult [Writing Process: Creating a
Position Argument](#).

+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| *Introduction*       | *That ...*           | *However, But,       |
|                      |                      | Despite ...*         |
|                      | *(What do critics    |                      |
|                      | claim?)*             | *(What do you say in |
|                      |                      | response?)*          |
+======================+======================+======================+
| While some may claim |                      |                      |
| ...                  |                      |                      |
|                      |                      |                      |
| Although critics     |                      |                      |
| argue ...            |                      |                      |
|                      |                      |                      |
| Those opposed        |                      |                      |
| suggest ...          |                      |                      |
|                      |                      |                      |
| Some opponents claim |                      |                      |
| ...                  |                      |                      |
|                      |                      |                      |
| Those critical of    |                      |                      |
| the idea argue ...   |                      |                      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
| Some opponents claim | that nutritional     | While this objection |
| ...                  | losses from such     | may be correct, it   |
|                      | land use do not      | does not address the |
|                      | fully translate into | fact that natural    |
|                      | losses of            | carbon sinks are     |
|                      | human-available      | being destroyed to   |
|                      | nutrients.           | increase             |
|                      |                      | agricultural land    |
|                      |                      | and, therefore,      |
|                      |                      | increase greenhouse  |
|                      |                      | gas emissions into   |
|                      |                      | the atmosphere.      |
+----------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

: Counterclaim organizer {#table-00006}

# Switch Sides {#sect-00010}

One way to gain a new perspective for revision is to switch sides in
arguing a position. Your peer conference partner can help you with this
exercise. Rewrite a paragraph of your draft from an alternative
viewpoint. Ask your partner to read both versions. Discuss the
similarities and differences regarding the rhetorical situation. In what
ways might you revise your original paragraph to better address the
issues of the alternative paragraph?

For example, Issa, a mountain bike enthusiast, wrote his draft in favor
of opening up more wilderness trails for mountain bikers to use.
However, before writing his final draft, he researched the arguments
against his position and wrote from that viewpoint:

Hikers and other passive trail users argue against allowing mountain
bikes onto narrow trails traditionally traveled only by foot and horse.
They point out that the wide, deeply treaded tires of mountain bikes
cause erosion and that the high speeds of the bikers startle and upset
both hikers and horses. According to hiker Donald Meserlain, the bikes
"ruin the tranquility of the woodlands and drive out hikers, bird
watchers, and strollers" (Hanley 4).

For the writer, the main advantage of switching sides for a draft may be
a better understanding of the opposition's viewpoint, making for a more
effective argument against it in the final draft. In fact, for his final
draft, Issa argues his original position in favor of mountain bikes, but
he does so with more understanding, empathy, and effectiveness because
he spent some time with the opposition. His final draft makes it clear
where he stands on the issue. The tone of the mountain bike essay is now
less strident and more thoughtful.

Educated mountain biking, like hiking and horseback riding, respects the
environment and promotes peace and conservation, not noise and
destruction. Making this case has begun to pay off, and the battle over
who walks and who rides the trails should now shift in favor of peaceful
coexistence. Buoyed by studies showing that bicycle tires cause no more
erosion or trail damage than the boots of hikers, and far less than
horses' hooves, mountain bike advocates are starting to find receptive
ears among environmental organizations (Schwartz 78).

Another switch that pays good dividends for the writer is changing the
audience. In college writing situations, the final audience always
includes the instructor, so such a change may simply be a temporary but
useful fiction. Had a draft of the mountain bike essay been aimed at the
different constituencies mentioned in the essay---the Sierra Club,
mountain bicycle manufacturers, property owners, or local
newspapers---the writer might have gained a useful perspective in
attempting to switch language and arguments to best address this more
limited readership. Likewise, drafts of various papers written to young
children, sympathetic classmates, skeptical professors, or sarcastic
friends may also provide useful variations in the writing perspective.

In addition to working with a partner on this activity, take some extra
time to check the essential elements of the argumentative research
essay. Note whether the paper you are reviewing has these elements:

a strong thesis

sufficient and accurate support for claims

a combination of summary, paraphrase, quotation, and synthesis

strong counterclaims

complete and correct citations

a strong closing

# Who's Game? {#sect-00011}

As you know, revising means reseeing, rereading, and rethinking your
thoughts on paper until they match your intention. Mentally, it is
conceptual work in which you focus on larger units of meaning. Be
prepared to do a lot of copying, cutting, pasting, crossing out, and
rewriting until you are satisfied with the ideas and where they appear
in your paper.
