m00120

67cd9c60-1ab0-477a-a441-6b0b78a59939

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Apply citation conventions systematically in your work, understanding
the concepts of intellectual property that motivate documentation
conventions.

Compose texts that integrate the writer's ideas with those from
appropriate sources.

Direct quotations are most effective when you integrate them smoothly
into the flow of your paper. You can do this by introducing the source
and reason for the quotation in a phrase or sentence. Readers should be
able to follow your meaning easily and to understand the relevance of
the quotation immediately.

# Introduce Quotations {#sect-00002}

Because readers need to know who is speaking, introduce quoted material
with a signal phrase (sometimes called an attributory phrase). A signal
phrase is a word or group of words that introduces borrowed or quoted
material and informs readers of the source and purpose of the quotation.
If the source is well-known, the name alone will be enough of a signal
phrase. For example, a first-year student wrote, "Henry David Thoreau
asserts in *Walden*, 'The mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation'"
(5).

If your paper focuses on the published work itself, introduce a
quotation with the work's title rather than the author's name, as long
as the reference is clear---for example, "*Walden* sets forth one
individual's antidote against the 'lives of quiet desperation' led by
the working class in mid-nineteenth-century America" (Thoreau 5). If
either the author or the source is not well-known, introduce the
quotation with a brief explanation to give readers enough context to
understand the quotation---for example, "Mary Catherine Bateson,
daughter of renown anthropologist Margaret Mead, has become, in her own
right, a student of modem civilization."

## Select the Right Signal Phrase {#sect-00003}

[Signal phrases](#) tell readers that the words or ideas that follow
come from another source. Signal phrases often contain a verb that
indicates the tone or intention of the author. To avoid monotony, vary
the placement and words of the signal phrases you use. Note the
differences, both slight and significant, in the following signal words
and phrases as you integrate some of them into your draft:

  -------------- ------------- ------------
  acknowledges   denies        points out
  admits         emphasizes    refutes
  agrees         endorses      reports
  argues         follows up    reveals
  asserts        grants        says
  believes       illustrates   shows
  claims         implies       states
  comments       insists       suggests
  concedes       maintains     thinks
  concludes      notes         writes
  declares       observes      
  -------------- ------------- ------------

# Quote Smoothly and Correctly {#sect-00004}

A direct quotation repeats an author's or speaker's exact words. Slight
changes in wording are permitted, but these changes must be clearly
marked. Although you cannot change what a source says, you do have
control over how much of it you use. Because using quotations that are
too long can imply that you have little to say for yourself, use only
the part of the quotation needed to make your point. Quotations should
support your points, not say them for you.

To shorten a quotation to include only the most important information,
integrate it smoothly and correctly into the body of your paragraph to
provide minimal disruption for readers. Unless the source quoted is
itself the topic of the paper (as in a literary interpretation), limit
brief quotations to no more than two per page and long quotations to no
more than one every three pages. The following examples illustrate both
correct and incorrect use of quoted material.

## Original Passage {#sect-00005}

According to one film critic, the plot is exciting, but most of the
dialogue "has the energy and impact of day-old gruel, without sugar,
spice, or raisins." In fact, if I had to judge the film on dialogue
alone, I'd say, "Save your money." Most of the characters alternate
between a low and intermittent mumble, like a distant helicopter with
engine trouble, and garbled whoops, as though speaking in tongues.
Perhaps this is the director's way of trying to mask a cornucopia of
cliché-ridden, monosyllabic utterances, which, I agree, are not worth
audience attention. Much of the acting is no better. However, some
notable exceptions eclipse all the negatives of the script and the
bit-part actors.

## Omit or Substitute Words Judiciously {#sect-00006}

Cutting words for the sake of brevity is often useful, but do not
distort meaning. Indicate omitted words by using ellipsis points (three
dots within a sentence, four to indicate a complete sentence is being
omitted). Use brackets (\[ \]) to indicate any changes or additions.

Distorted Quotation

"The plot is exciting . . . the dialogue has . . . energy and impact."

The critic's words are taken out of context. Negatives are removed, as
are the critic's dismissive comments about the film and the exceptions
to the opinion.

Accurate Quotation

"The plot is exciting, but most of the dialogue 'has the energy and
impact of day-old gruel. . . .' However, some notable exceptions eclipse
all the negatives of the script."

## Quotation Marks for Short Quotations {#sect-00007}

Embed brief quotations in the main body of your paper, and enclose them
in quotation marks. The previous examples in this section are brief and
would be embedded within paragraphs as normal sentences. According to
MLA style guidelines, a brief prose quotation consists of four or fewer
typed lines; a brief poetry quotation consists of three or fewer typed
lines.

## Block Format for Long Quotations {#sect-00008}

Set quotations of more than four lines in block format. Block quotations
are indented but spaced the same as the normal text. Format block
quotations as follows:

Introduce the quotation in the last line of normal text with a sentence
that ends with a colon.

Indent one half inch, and then begin the quotation.

Do not use quotation marks, as the indentation signals direct quotation.

Include the page number, in parentheses, after the end punctuation.

For example, this student writing on Thoreau used a block quotation from
*Walden* to describe the scenery in the author's own words:

The scenery of Walden is on a humble scale, and, though very beautiful,
does not approach to grandeur, nor can it much concern one who has not
long frequented it or lived by its shore; yet this pond is so remarkable
for its depth and purity as to merit a particular description. It is a
clear and deep green well, half a mile long and a mile and three
quarters in circumference, and contains about sixty-one and a half
acres; a perennial spring in the midst of pine and oak woods, without
any visible inlet or outlet except by the clouds and evaporation (195).

## Explain and Clarify Quotations {#sect-00009}

Sometimes you will need to explain a quotation's relevance or meaning in
the context of your discussion. For example, one student wrote, "In *A
Sand County Almanac,* author Aldo Leopold invites modern urban readers
to confront what they lose by living in the city and mentions the
resulting 'spiritual dangers': 'supposing that breakfast comes from the
grocery and . . . heat comes from the furnace' (6). Leopold sees
city-dwellers as self-centered children, blissfully but dangerously
unaware of how their basic needs are met."

If you need to clarify what a word or reference means, write your
definition or explanation and enclose it within square brackets.

## Adjust for Clarity and Accuracy {#sect-00010}

A passage containing a quotation must follow all the rules of
grammatical sentence structure: tenses should be consistent, verbs and
subjects should agree, and so on. If the form of the quotation doesn't
quite fit the grammar of your own sentences, you can either quote less
of the original source, change your sentences, or make a slight
alteration in the quotation. For example, you might write, "Leopold
writes that city dwellers assume 'breakfast comes from the grocery'" or
"Leopold writes that city dwellers '\[suppose\] that breakfast comes
from the grocery.'" For more information on using quotations, see
[Editing Focus: Quotations](#) and [Quotations](#).

# When to Quote {#sect-00011}

Reserve direct quotations for cases in which you cannot express ideas
better yourself or when the exact words offer the strongest support for
your ideas. Use quotations when the original words are especially
precise, clear, powerful, or vivid, but ensure they do not substitute
for your own thoughts.

*Precise.* Use quotations when the words are important in themselves or
when the author makes fine but important distinctions.

"Government, even in its best state, is but a necessary evil: in its
worst state, an intolerable one."---Thomas Paine

Clear.

Use quotations when the author's ideas are complex and difficult to
paraphrase. "Paragraphs tell readers how writers want to be
read."---William Blake

*Powerful.* Use quotations when the words are especially authoritative
and memorable.

"You shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free."---John
8:32, King James Version

*Vivid.* Use quotations when the language is lively and colorful, when
it reveals something of the author's or speaker's character.

"A person who won't read has no advantage over one who can't
read."---Mark Twain
