m00122

b7785085-cc79-451b-b996-85c4128d4ed6

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Avoid bias and stereotyping in your writing.

Evaluate sources for language bias and stereotyping.

When you begin any research project, it is important to have set checks
and balances to ensure you are not unknowingly imposing your own biases
into your research. A bias is a personal and usually unreasoned
judgment, or a prejudice. Although it may be impossible to function
without any bias (good or bad), you *can* consider possible components
of bias in your research. No document can be completely objective, for
all documents are created by people who have been socialized in some
way; therefore, it is helpful to think about the biases of authors of
research documents. Many researchers are clear about their biases and
state them in introductions to their writings, whereas others may
use---or omit---evidence in a way that implies bias for or against the
topic.

As a student researcher, seek to be as transparent and critically
self-reflective as possible about your preconceptions and language use.
Although you will revisit the concept of bias in source selection in
[The Research Process: Where to Look for Existing Sources](#), in this
section you will look at bias in topic choice and language use.

# Language Bias {#sect-00002}

[Language bias](#) refers to words and expressions that are offensive,
demeaning, or prejudicial toward individuals or groups on the basis of
gender, race, ethnicity, social class, appearance, physical or mental
abilities, or sexual orientation. One form of [language bias](#) is
sexist language that includes only one gender. The most common
occurrence is use of the word *man* or *men* to stand for all
people---including those who are not male. Language has changed to be
more inclusive, with terms such as *firefighter* replacing *fireman* and
*mail carrier* replacing *mailman*.

Another kind of language bias focuses on people's health or abilities,
indicating a person as a "victim" of a certain disease or "suffering
from it." Use unbiased language to identify the person as someone "with
X disease." Similarly, refer to a "person who is blind" rather than a
"blind person." This kind of language focuses on the person, not the
disease or ability.

To avoid language bias, follow these guidelines:

Use currently accepted terminology when referring to groups of people.
If you are writing about a group of people and are unsure of the proper
terminology, research the most recent usage patterns before you write.
The same is true for pronoun references, about which you can find more
information in

Editing Focus: Pronouns

and

Pronouns

.

Be sensitive when referring to people with disabilities by using a
"people first" approach. For example, say "a person who uses a
wheelchair" instead of "a wheelchair-bound person."

Avoid stereotyping---that is, attributing positive or negative
characteristics to people on the basis of groups to which they belong.
Although not strictly linguistic, stereotyping comes through in making
assumptions about people. A stereotypical attitude would be to assume
that all or most rich people act in certain ways and, conversely, that
all or most poor people act in certain ways. Another stereotypical
attitude would be to assume that a person who comes from a particular
area of the country adheres to a certain political agenda.

# Assignment: Reviewing Your Research Essay for Language Bias {#sect-00003}

First, review your essay, and speculate as to biases or blocks you may
have incorporated while researching and writing. Freewrite, reflecting
on these possibilities. Next, go through your essay one section at a
time, and highlight any people references, pronouns, biased language,
and instances of possible stereotyping. Using the information above and
your reflective freewrite, complete a bias chart like the one shown in
[\#](#). Next, exchange your essay with two other classmates to see
whether they detect bias of which you were unaware. After receiving
feedback from two or three people, form a group and discuss what each of
you found and how to use alternative language or references. Finally,
revisit your freewriting after collaborating with your classmates to
reconsider what you wrote before. Add a section to the freewrite in
which you relate what your group discussed and what you may have learned
from that discussion.

  Essay Section   Essay Language   Possible Bias   Possible Revision
  --------------- ---------------- --------------- -------------------
                                                   

  : Bias chart {#table-00001}

# Publish Your Work {#sect-00004}

After completing your argumentative research paper, you should have a
product to be proud of. Your instructor may have a plan to publish
papers written by class members, or you may be interested in publishing
on your own and joining a wider scholarly conversation. Consider
submitting your work to one of these journals that publish undergraduate
research:

Butler Journal of Undergraduate Research

Crossing Borders: A Multidisciplinary Journal of Undergraduate
Scholarship

Liberated Arts: A Journal for Undergraduate Research

Reinvention: An International Journal of Undergraduate Research

In addition, if you have designed your research project as a solution to
a local problem, consider finding venues to disseminate the information
to those for whom it would be the most useful. This decision may mean
adjusting the format, tone, language, and/or conventions of your work to
address the needs of a specific audience.
