m00123

83dd7f56-fd9e-4342-a2f8-77229a8f8125

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Distinguish between facts, inferences, and informed opinion and when to
use each.

Analyze how facts have shaped your research and composing processes.

As this assignment draws to a close, you will note that facts, examples,
inferences, informed opinions, and personal experiences all provided
believable evidence for your argument. However, be aware that the
difference between facts and other evidence is that facts are
verifiable. That Alaska has the most territory of all U.S. states is not
up for question or interpretation; personal belief or opinion is
irrelevant. Unless their accuracy is challenged, facts are essential in
any research paper. Yet they can be misleading when used in certain ways
or proved incorrect by later discovery. Hopefully, you have supported
your research paper with verifiable factual information.

Inferences are conclusions based on a combination of facts and personal
knowledge. For example, if you attend five different classes in five
different academic departments and find no minority students in each
class, you may infer that very few minority students attend the school.
However, although your inference may seem reasonable, it is not a fact
because you have not met all the students at the college, nor do you
have access to enrollment figures.

Facts are not necessarily better or more important than inferences; they
serve different purposes. Facts provide information, and inferences give
that information meaning. Sometimes inferences are all you will have
available. For example, statistics reflecting what "Americans" believe
or do are only inferences about these groups based on information
collected from a relatively small number of individuals. To be credible,
inferences must be reasonable and based on factual evidence.

Expert opinion makes strong evidence. A forest ranger's testimony about
trail damage caused by mountain bikes or lug-soled hiking boots reflects
the training and experience of an expert. A casual hiker making the same
observation is less believable.

Personal testimony or informed opinion is based on direct personal
experience. When someone has experienced something firsthand, their
knowledge cannot be discounted easily. If you have been present at the
mistreatment of someone, whether as the object or observer of the
incident, your eyewitness testimony will carry weight.

# Reflective Task {#sect-00002}

After reflecting on your argumentative research essay by considering
bias, facts, and inferences, you now have the opportunity to reflect on
what you learned through the research and writing process in general.
Think critically about your writing process, reflect on each stage, and
consider how this writing experience was similar to or different from
others. Also, estimate roughly what percent of your sources are facts,
examples, inferences, or informed opinion. As you reflect, answer the
following questions in your notebook or as part of a cover letter for
your research paper:

How did you decide on the topic for your paper?

How did you decide on the scope of your topic?

What did you know about your topic before you began your research?

What did you learn about your topic?

What primary and secondary sources did you collect, and why?

How did you arrive at a workable thesis?

How did you determine which sources best supported your thesis?

Did you rely most on facts, examples, inferences, expert opinion, or
personal experiences? Why?

What type of citation did you use for crediting material you did not
write?

How did collaboration with others help you as you wrote and revised your
paper?

How did the writing for this paper compare with other writing
assignments? Was it easier or harder to write than others you have
written?

How did you manage the timing of your essay, from topic selection, to
gathering sources, to writing and revising?

What could you have done differently to make your writing process easier
or more effective?

What insights do have about yourself as a writer?

# Further Reading {#sect-00003}

These sources address argument and are based on researched evidence.

Lanier, Jaron. *Ten Arguments for Deleting Your Social Media Accounts
Right Now.* Picador, 2019.

O'Neill, Cathy. *Weapons of Math Destruction.* Crown, 2017.

Zuboff, Shoshona. *The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a
Human Future at the New Frontier of Power.* PublicAffairs, 2020.

# Works Cited {#sect-00004}

Burke, Kenneth. *The Philosophy of Literary Form: Studies in Symbolic
Action*. 3rd ed., U of California P, 1973, pp. 110--11.

Giorgis, Hannah. "Samin Nosrat Wants Everybody to Cook." *The Atlantic*,
14 Oct. 2018,
theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2018/10/samin-nosrat-salt-fat-acid-heat-netflix/572731/.

Leopold, Aldo. *A Sand County Almanac.* Oxford UP, 1949.

Morabito, Greg. "Samin Nosrat Turned Her TV Dream into a Reality with
Netflix's 'Salt, Fat, Acid, Heat.'" *Eater*, 10 Oct. 2018,
eater.com/2018/10/10/17949862/samin-nosrat-salt-fat-acid-heat-netflix.

Nosrat, Samin. *Salt, Fat, Acid, Heat: Mastering the Elements of Good
Cooking*. Simon & Schuster, 2017.

Pinsker, Joe. "The Why of Cooking." *The Atlantic*, 25 Apr. 2017,
theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2017/04/the-why-of-cooking-samin-nosrat/523923/.

*The Purdue OWL Family of Sites*. The Writing Lab and OWL at Purdue and
Purdue U, 2008, owl.purdue.edu/owl/purdue_owl.html. Accessed 25 Jan.
2021.

Rosner, Helen. "'I Fail Almost Every Day': An Interview with Samin
Nosrat." *The New Yorker*, 23 Feb. 2020,
newyorker.com/culture/the-new-yorker-interview/i-fail-almost-every-day-an-interview-with-samin-nosrat.

Thoreau, Henry David. *Walden; Or Life in the Woods*. Ticknor and
Fields, 1854. *Project Gutenberg,* 29 Jan. 2021,
gutenberg.org/files/205/205-h/205-h.htm.
