m00019

942cd845-3a4e-4c29-9c13-940490441288

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Based on his dealings with white people who could read and write,
Sequoyah (c. 1775--1843), a Cherokee leader, believed that power
resulted from the ability to share knowledge. A written language
comprehensible and accessible to the Cherokee people could be far more
effective in preserving their culture than relying on memory or oral
tradition. Hoping to unite and strengthen the Cherokee politically after
they were forced from their lands by the U.S. government, Sequoyah spent
10 years developing a method for his people to communicate in writing.
His language system, based on written symbols representing syllables
spoken in the Cherokee language, was treated skeptically at first but
was later adopted and used in Cherokee newspapers, official documents,
and descriptions of rituals and medicines.

Although the use of the Cherokee language eventually gave way to
English, Sequoyah remained true to all aspects of Cherokee culture. He
spoke only Cherokee, wore the clothing of his people, and followed
Cherokee religious customs, refusing to assimilate in any way. As
evidenced by Sequoyah's ideas about communication, language, writing,
and culture are clearly linked. Although Sequoyah had political purposes
in mind, a common language is an important element of shared culture and
goes further in developing a sense of cultural identity than what
Sequoyah may have envisioned at the time.

While all humans have the same basic needs---food, water, shelter,
affection, and a sense of belonging---cultural identity is shaped by
family, upbringing, language, and geographical location. You may have
grown up in a small town, in a large city, or in the suburbs; you may
have been raised with siblings and may have attended church; you may
speak more than one language. You may be single, married, or dating; you
may drive a car, SUV, or truck. All your lived experiences have shaped
who you are today. Identity is the word that encompasses all the parts
of yourself that make you who you are. For example, if you were to
respond to all of the scenarios presented in the sentences above, your
answers would collectively make up at least some of your identity.

Having a variety of identities might result in both advantages and
disadvantages associated with your lived experiences. Those advantages
are called privileges, and the disadvantages discrimination. When you
consider that people have multiple identities, also consider that these
multiple identities lead to various points of intersection among lived
experiences. The idea of intersectionality, then, helps you consider
systems of privilege or discrimination projected onto people as a
consequence of their identities.

Considering your own identity and position in the world, as well as the
identities and positions of others, gives critical meaning to your
personal and academic writing. Experiences make people who they are,
teaching them how to move through the world and consider the effects
their actions and words have on others.

In this chapter, you will explore the concept of cultural identity.
*What kind of lived experiences have you had?* How have those
experiences shaped and molded you? What experiences have others had, and
how have those experiences shaped them?

Whenever you consider lived experiences, think about the contexts in
which they occur, and the systems of communication used in those
contexts. The word culture includes the expressions, customs, practices,
and experiences that connect a person to other people in their present,
past, and future. Who you are is closely connected to the cultures you
inhabit and the ways in which you communicate. Among the more noticeable
markers of your identities are the languages you speak. In this chapter,
language is defined as a system of words used to communicate. Just as
you likely have multiple identities, you likely speak varieties of
languages as part of each of those identities.

The goal of this chapter in particular, and this text in general, is to
help you think critically about language, culture, and identity in ways
that make room for everyone's lived experiences. In this chapter, you
will learn how authors use language to communicate their sense of
cultural identity. You will read about Cathy Park Hong and W. E. B. Du
Bois, activists who have used writing to explore identity and culture.
You will examine your own culture as well as your personal, unconscious
bias, reflecting on both of these aspects of identity to increase your
understanding of the world.
