m00020

8f9673ed-de89-47f9-a991-bfabca5d64c0

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain the importance of communication in various cultural,
language-related, and rhetorical situations.

Articulate how language use can promote social justice and equality.

Between 1870 and 1900, nearly 12 million immigrants arrived in the
United States, many through Ellis Island. Many sought relief from
religious and political persecution; others were skilled workers in
search of jobs. Once in the United States, many immigrants faced
difficulties adjusting to the demands of life in a new country,
including the challenges of learning a new language and new customs.
They moved into neighborhoods where others from the same country already
resided. There, they lived among those who knew their language and
customs, ate familiar food, and participated in cultural practices
handed down by their ancestors. Living in immigrant communities reminded
people of their home countries and kept their cultures alive.

# Understanding Culture {#sect-00002}

Culture includes observable aspects, such as the religion and language
of a group of people, as well as intangible aspects, such as shared
preferences, attitudes, and behaviors. For example, in Black women's
natural hair culture, wash day practices might be prescribed and may
involve assistance from other members of the group, whether family or
friends. This community has a shared vocabulary of hair types labeled
from 1 to 4 for curl type and A to C for curl diameter, as well as steps
such as *detangle* and *lift* and styling techniques such as *twist
out*, *braid out*, *wash and go*, and *updo.* These terms evolved from
Black women's shared experiences. Likewise, in Hispanic culture, the
*quinceañera* is a custom and rite of passage for 15-year-old girls. The
elaborate celebration is attended by the girl's extended family and
recognized by the cultural community at large. Participation in regular
daily practices, such as Black women's natural hair culture, and
once-in-a-lifetime celebrations, such as the *quinceañera*, can
contribute to a person's culture and sense of identity.

The iceberg is often used as a metaphor for culture. The top of the
iceberg, visible to all, is much smaller than the part hidden below the
water. So it is with culture. The less obvious parts of culture can
sometimes be "hidden" from observers. This lack of knowledge can make
understanding cultures other than your own more difficult because these
hidden parts are more challenging to recognize or understand.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Within a culture, beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors are both taught
explicitly and learned implicitly. Think back for a moment to your high
school days. You may have attended a freshman orientation that included
a tour of the building, a summary of school rules, and an overview of
the school schedule. This orientation was the beginning of your cultural
understanding of the school and your role in it. But as you began
attending regularly, you probably learned other, often unspoken cultural
traditions and norms---perhaps ninth graders were expected to sit in a
certain part of the cafeteria, for example. All cultures teach in
similar ways. This conscious and unconscious learning process develops
beliefs and attitudes that you come to view as valid. You then express
these beliefs through your actions and teach them to other members.

Culture is not static; it changes and grows dynamically in response to
any number of variables. Some aspects are difficult to interpret,
particularly language. In fact, culture plays a significant role in the
use of language. Not only does it affect *what* is said, but culture
also affects *how* it is said (including tone). Different aspects of
culture can be interpreted differently by various groups, making
language among the most challenging aspects of culture.

# Situating Self {#sect-00003}

Attending college and participating in academic traditions are now a
part of your identity. This new environment not only welcomes the
traditions you bring with you but also will teach you new ones, thereby
broadening your view of culture and the world. In this new cultural
environment, you may struggle to find your place. Embrace this struggle
because it is a sign of personal growth and development. What is
important to note is that even though you may struggle to situate
yourself in this new environment, nothing should prevent the self you
bring with you to college from finding its proper place. In other words,
you do not need to lose who you are to become who you will be. Former
First Lady Michelle Obama (b. 1964) writes in her book *Becoming* (2018)
that your personal story "is what you have, what you will always have.
It is something to own." So make space in your understanding of yourself
for the value that your cultural experiences provide to others in this
new environment. By sharing yourself---your culture and identity---with
peers and professors, you give them an opportunity to develop and grow.
College or university is a place for you to have experiences that help
you first figure out who you already are and then explore who you want
to be. Allow these experiences to provide that opportunity.

A cultural system includes all parts of a culture that shape its
members: its beliefs, traditions, and rituals. Self-awareness about your
own culture includes an examination of who and what have influenced your
perception of the world and how you experience it. This perception,
often called a cultural lens, affects how you understand the world and
will change as you form new experiences. For example, your religious
culture may influence your beliefs. However, if challenged by a new
cultural experience, those beliefs may be reinforced, shift, or change
completely.

# Exploring Voice {#sect-00004}

One discovery that often comes out of a first-year college writing
experience is finding your writing voice. When instructors talk about
voice in writing, they are imagining a rhetorical mixture of these
elements:

Vocabulary

:

the words used to express your thoughts

Tone

:

the attitude conveyed through your words

Viewpoint

:

the position or perspective that comes through your writing

Syntax

:

the order or arrangement of words

Because they provide innumerable possibilities, combinations of words,
attitude, perspective, and word order will create a unique signature for
your writing---one that expresses your identity as a writer.

Communication is a cornerstone of culture. It is the way people share
experiences, build relationships, and develop community. Similarly,
expressing communication through writing is a powerful way to share
culture. Just as a person's body language reveals a deeper meaning
behind their spoken language, so does a writer's voice provide deeper
insight into their culture and identity.
