m00021

eb0711bf-9e20-4fdc-a7f6-b2a879722e0e

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain how authors weave identity into their compositions.

Articulate how genre conventions are shaped by purpose, culture, and
expectation.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

"Sometimes you need to explain your experiences in order to understand
them yourself."
::::

# Fear: The Enemy Within {#sect-00002}

Cathy Park Hong (b. 1976) is an Asian American poet, writer, and
educator committed to exploring living art. Born to Korean parents in
Los Angeles, California, Hong studied at Oberlin College and at the
Writers' Workshop at the University of Iowa, where she earned a master
of fine arts degree. She has received numerous fellowships, including a
Fulbright scholarship, a Guggenheim Fellowship, a National Endowment for
the Arts Fellowship, and a New York Foundation for the Arts Fellowship.
Hong has taught at Sarah Lawrence College and Rutgers University and
served as poetry editor for the *New Republic.*

In her work, Hong explores her search for identity as a first-generation
Asian American, specifically her struggles with feeling alienated from
Anglo-American culture. Hong's first publication, the book of poems
*Translating Mo'um* (2002), examines the often tenuous challenges
experienced by first-generation Americans, specifically regarding
language. Her second book of poems, *Dance Dance Revolution: Poems*
(2007), won the Barnard Women Poets Prize. The work incorporates the
idea of "code switching," a technique in which people switch between
languages or language forms, such as formal and colloquial.

Hong most recently published a collection of essays titled *Minor
Feelings: An Asian American Reckoning* (2020), a memoir that takes on
the lens of cultural criticism. Writing from her personal experiences as
an Asian American woman growing up and living in America, Hong delves
into deeply painful and often unseen racial trauma experienced by Asians
and Asian Americans. Published as anti-Asian hate crimes gained
increasing national attention, Hong's essays help readers understand the
curious place that Asian Americans inhabit in American race relations,
where they are viewed as caricatures of the "model minority" and face
invisible racism.

The title of *Minor Feelings* comes from the word *han*, which Koreans
use to describe emotions that include anger, melancholy, envy, and
shame. Hong believes these same emotions are shared by minorities in
America today. She expresses difficulty in using the pronoun *we* in her
writing because of the diversity of Asian Americans. Yet she notes that
what this diverse population has in common is that even as second- and
third-generation Americans, Asian Americans find they still don't enjoy
first-class status in American life in the same way that White Americans
do. She proposes thinking of the label *Asian Americans* as "less of an
identity, and more as a coalition" (Hong, "Why") in order to seek common
ground with others who share similar experiences. Hong believes that one
key is cross-cultural community building among Asian communities and
between Asian, Black, Latina/Latino, and Indigenous communities.

Hong's poetry and essays also explore the racism she has experienced in
the literary world, from graduate school to literary circles. Perhaps
the most maddening part of those experiences, she notes, is that her
perception of racism is constantly "questioned or dismissed" (Hong,
*Minor* 55). Although writing about racial experiences was discouraged
as "anti-academic" when she was a student, Hong has made a career of
sharing these experiences through poetry and prose. She hopes that her
work not only helps Asian Americans feel recognized and acknowledged but
also encourages readers of all ethnicities to practice
self-interrogation.

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00003}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
