m00022

fab2cd5d-f992-4b5e-9109-de7a53d0bf01

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Articulate how language conventions shape and are shaped by readers' and
writers' practices and purposes.

Define

oppression

and explain its effects.

Define

inclusion

and summarize ways to write inclusively.

Writing about identity and culture gives authors the opportunity to
share personal experiences and provides a vehicle for storytelling. This
storytelling can turn into a purposeful message with meaningful
rhetorical impact.

# What Is Oppression? {#sect-00002}

Some languages, cultures, and identities face discrimination. People
often believe that for one group to advance, another must be held back.
This suppression of growth, advancement, economic development, and
educational opportunity has led to systems of oppression---prolonged and
sustained unjust treatment---for some groups. For example, Black people
from various parts of Africa endured centuries of oppression because of
the transatlantic slave trade. Between the mid-16th and mid-19th
centuries, European, Spanish, and American groups captured an estimated
10--12 million African men, women, and children from their homelands,
boarded them on ships, and transported them to Europe, the Caribbean,
and the Americas to be sold into enslavement. After 1865, when the
Thirteenth Amendment abolished slavery in the United States, Black
people continued to be denied basic human rights, such as the
opportunity to work at certain jobs, despite their educational
achievement; to be served a meal in a restaurant; to use a public
restroom or water fountain; to shop for necessities in a grocery or
department store; or to live peacefully in their own communities. Black
Americans have continued to be subjected to social inequities. As a
community, they suffer from higher rates of incarceration, lower pay
rates, fewer educational opportunities, and higher mortality at the
hands of law enforcement---injustices that stem from racist policies of
centuries past. Similarly, Indigenous people have been subjected to
hundreds of years of oppression and silencing, often the result of
colonialization, which included stripping them of their customs, land,
language, and lives.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Oppression isn't just a historical problem---it extends to society
today. In the two decades since the September 11, 2001, attacks on the
United States and the subsequent War on Terror, Muslims and Sikhs have
experienced hate crimes and oppression. People who identify as LGBTQ
have been shunned or persecuted, subjected to hate crimes, and banned
from serving in the military and have struggled to gain the right to
marry. [This TED Talk](#) highlights the struggle for transgender
rights.

In addition, migrant and refugee families, largely from countries in
Central and South America, have been separated and jailed in recent
efforts to curtail immigration along the southern U.S. border. Asian
Americans have been subjected to racially motivated harassment and
attacks, heightened by the COVID-19 pandemic, including the violent
March 2021 mass shooting at an Asian American massage parlor. [This TED
Talk](#) discusses the harm of Asian stereotypes. Discrimination has
persisted for generations and continues to make it difficult for those
who oppress to view the oppressed as their equals.

# Reclaiming Humanity {#sect-00003}

One way to help restructure the world to reduce or even eliminate
oppression is to explore your own biases. A bias occurs when you
prejudicially favor one person, place, thing, or idea over another.
People are naturally conditioned to favor the familiar over the
unfamiliar. If you begin to question why you think as you do or make the
decisions you make, you may begin to view others as equal, even though
they may look different, live differently, and experience the world
differently.

Two of the most frequent ways people isolate others are through markers
of identity, especially race and gender, and through language varieties,
such as standard and nonstandard English. If your view of people is
primarily influenced by their physical features and the words they
speak, you do not allow yourself to engage fully with them in their
humanity.

Viewing others as people first and understanding the importance of
questioning the lens through which you view them is the beginning.
However, you also have to think critically about language bias. When you
hear people of African descent speak in African American Vernacular
English (AAVE) or speak English with Caribbean or African accents, you
may make assumptions about who they are and what they know. When you
encounter people who speak English with Spanish accents, you also may
make assumptions about who they are and their place in the world.
However, when you hear British English or English spoken with a French,
German, or Slavic accent, you may notice the difference, but you also
may make a different set of assumptions about those people.

# Anti-racism as Inclusion {#sect-00004}

One way to be inclusive is to write in specifically anti-racist ways.
Inclusive writing begins with identifying ways in which language can be
and has been used to exclude cultures, social groups, or races.
Exclusive language is, unfortunately, ingrained in much of academia. It
is a product of habit and the assumption that all readers are alike,
with similar experiences, values, and beliefs. To write inclusively,
think beyond yourself by considering other perspectives, groups, and
races that may be harmed by thoughtless word choices.

Here are several principles to help you develop inclusive and
anti-racist writing:

Consider the assumptions you make about readers, and then work to
address those assumptions.

Choose language carefully.

Revise with a critical eye. Look for racist phrases and words that label
cultures negatively.

Seek feedback and receive it with an open mind primed for learning.
Because writing is personal, you may easily feel offended or dismissive.
However, feedback, especially from people whose perspective differs from
yours, can help you grow in anti-racist knowledge.

Consider rhetoric and presentation. Aim to make your writing
understandable, straightforward, and accessible. Use a glossary or
footnotes to explain complex terms or ideas.

Avoid casual phrases that suggest people with disabilities or from other
cultures are victims and avoid euphemisms that refer to cultures to
which you do not belong. Similarly, avoid using mental health issues in
metaphors.

Think about your adjectives. Some groups or people prefer not to be
described by an adjective. It is important to follow individual groups'
preferences for being referred to in either person-first or
identity-first language.

Avoid stereotyping; write about an individual as an individual, not as
if they represent an entire group or culture. You may also choose to use
gender-neutral pronouns.

Be precise with meaning. Rather than describing something as "crazy,"
try a more precise term such as

intense

,

uncontrolled

, or

foolish

to give a more accurate description.

Impact overrules intent. The impact of your language on your reader is
more important than your good intentions. When you learn better, do
better.

# Exploring the Issues {#sect-00005}

The following key terms and characteristics provide a better understand
of anti-racist and inclusive writing:

Ally

:

a person who identifies as a supporter of marginalized groups and who
advocates for them

Anti-racist

:

adhering to a set of beliefs and actions that oppose racism and promote
inclusion and equality of marginalized groups

Critical race theory

:

the idea that racism is ingrained in the institutions and systems of
American society

Cultural appropriation

:

taking the creative or artistic forms of a different culture and using
them as one's own, particularly in a way that is disrespectful of the
original context

Culture

:

the shared beliefs, values, and assumptions of a group of people

Emotional tax

:

the invisible mental stress taken on by people of marginalized
backgrounds in an attempt to feel included, respected, and safe

Ethnocentrism

:

the idea that one's own culture is inherently better than other cultures

Intersectionality

:

the intertwining of different aspects of social identities, including
gender, race, culture, ethnicity, social class, religion, and sexual
orientation, that results in unique experiences and opportunities

Microaggression

:

behavior or speech that subtly or indirectly expresses prejudice based
on race, gender, ability, age, or other aspects of identity, often but
not always without an individual's conscious intention (For example, the
drill team director instructs all members to wear their hair straight
for competition.)

Neurodiversity

:

the idea that humans have a range of differences in neurological
functioning that should be respected

Unconscious bias

:

any implicit, unfair preferences that people hold without being aware of
them
