m00024

3f9b6872-af4b-4c5c-9179-d5f41d79d506

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain the importance of communication in various cultural, language,
and rhetorical situations.

Implement a variety of drafting strategies to demonstrate the connection
between language and social justice.

Apply the composition processes and tools as a means to discover and
reconsider ideas.

Participate in the collaborative and social aspects of writing
processes.

Give and act on productive feedback to works in progress.

Now it's your turn to join this cultural conversation. As you write,
keep your audience in mind as well as the principles of inclusivity and
anti-racism that you have learned about. Consider how you can share your
personal experiences, ideas, and beliefs in a way that is inclusive of
all and shows sensitivity to the culture of your readers.

# Summary of Assignment: Cultural Artifact {#sect-00002}

Choose an artifact that symbolizes something about a culture to which
you belong. This might be a physical object that you have, or it may be
a metaphorical object, such as Du Bois's color line or veil, that
represents something larger about your culture. Write approximately
350--700 words describing it, using sensory detail and explaining its
meaning both to you personally and within your culture. To begin your
thinking, view [this TEDx Talk](#) for a discussion of cultural
artifacts and narrative led by artist David Bailey.

Another Lens 1. Choose a space that is important to a cultural community
to which you belong. While visiting this space, conduct an hour-long
observation. Respond in writing to these items: *Describe the space in
detail. What do you see permanently affixed in the space? What activity
is going on? How is the space currently used? What is the atmosphere?
How are you feeling while conducting your observation?* Then, do some
brief research on the space (using the Internet, the library, or campus
archives), and answer these questions: *What is the history of the
space? When was it established, and under what circumstances? How has
this space been used in the past? What is your response or reaction to
this history?* Then write a passage in which you highlight a unique
feature of the space and your cultural relationship to it.

Another Lens 2. Considering Du Bois's theory of double consciousness,
explore the ways in which you may experience competing identities or
competing cultures in your own life. *What experiences have you had or
witnessed where language clashed with or supported your identity or
culture? What happened? How did others react? How did you react? What
insight does your experience offer on this discussion of rhetoric and
the power of language to define, shape, and change or give birth to
identity or culture?*

# Joining the Dialogue {#sect-00003}

You may choose to use journaling to develop your language use and voice.
Journaling, or keeping a written record of your thoughts and ideas, can
clarify your thoughts and emotions, help you better understand your
values, and increase your creativity. The following two journaling
techniques should help you get started.

## Character Sketch and Captured Moment {#sect-00004}

Because your cultural artifact may be tied to a person, a character
sketch might help you think about its significance. A character sketch
is a brief description of a real or fictional person---in this case,
likely someone you know or even yourself. In it, you describe the
character's personality, physical traits, habits, history,
relationships, and ties to the cultural artifact. You may include
research about the character to introduce readers to them. Use the
following format if you need more guidance:

### Character Sketch {#sect-00005}

Introduction

Quotation

Anecdote about the character

Most important traits

Supporting Details

Physical appearance

Actions

Thoughts

Language

Ties to cultural artifact

A character sketch of your grandmother might read as follows.

My first memory of Nonna materializes in the kitchen, where we are
baking Swedish cookies together. She carefully shows me how to measure
ingredients, stirring with her hand over mine in her deep
"cookie-making" bowl. Nonna is a slight woman with a big heart full of
kindness. She teaches me many skills, both in and out of the kitchen,
that I still use today. Some have proven to be life lessons. She never
met a stranger she didn't like and often said it takes more effort to be
unkind than kind. Because of Nonna, the Swedish cookie has become a
metaphor for my life. The ingredients of one's life make up an identity,
and the combination is always delicious.

Another journaling technique is to record a captured moment through the
examination of a cultural artifact. This exercise lets you use an
artifact as a means to look at an event in your life and create a
written piece that captures its importance, emotion, or meaning. Select
an artifact and an experience. Think about what they mean to you. *What
do you remember, and why?* Then go deeper. Analyze the long-term meaning
of it in your life. Try to recreate the artifact and then the experience
in your mind, and relive the sensations you experienced in the moment.

## Choose the Artifact {#sect-00006}

Begin your assignment by choosing your artifact. You may take
inspiration from W. E. B. Du Bois's image of the veil in the annotated
sample in the previous section. Or, going back to the beginning of this
chapter and Sequoyah's syllabary, you may choose to take inspiration
from something linguistic, an expression or a way of talking that is
associated with your culture. You may choose an artifact that, like the
veil, has metaphorical significance. Or you may choose a more tangible
artifact, such as a religious symbol, a traditional clothing item, or
any number of objects related to your chosen culture.

Once you have chosen your artifact, do a prewriting exercise called a
freewrite. In this activity, set a time limit (say, 10 minutes), and
write whatever comes to mind about your object within that time. Don't
worry about organization, flow, grammar, punctuation, or whether your
writing is "good"; just write. This exercise not only gets your creative
juices flowing but also allows you to put pen to paper and opens your
mind to what may be subconscious thoughts about the object as it relates
to culture.

Next, it is time to take a more refined approach to planning your
writing. Think back to [The Digital World: Building on What You Already
Know to Respond Critically](#), which addresses the different purposes
for writing. To help shape your writing use a separate sheet of paper to
answer the questions in [\#](#).

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---
  Who is my audience?                                                                         
  What is my purpose for writing?                                                             
  What organizational strategies will I use?                                                  
  How will I introduce my artifact?                                                           
  How will I describe my artifact using sensory language?                                     
  Will I share personal anecdotes, examples, or ideas?                                        
  How will I add cultural context to my writing to help my audience understand my culture?    
  What transitions will I use?                                                                
  How will I end my writing?                                                                  
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---

  : Planning questions {#table-00001}

# Critical Context {#sect-00007}

In your writing, try to incorporate and respond to the current cultural
climate. Context is information that helps readers understand the
cultural factors that affect your ideas, actions, and thoughts. Context
helps build the relationship between you as a writer and your audience,
providing clarity and meaning. For example, Du Bois's veil means very
little until readers understand the deep racial divide that existed
during his lifetime, including Jim Crow laws, segregation, and violent
crimes committed against his fellow Black Americans.

## Cultural Context {#sect-00008}

Sharing cultural context helps your readers understand elements of
culture they may be unfamiliar with. Consider what background
information you need to provide, especially information that is integral
to readers' understanding of the traditions, beliefs, and actions that
relate to your artifact. Essentially, you will need to close the gap
between your own culture and that of your readers.

Armed with your freewrite and your answers to the questions as a
starting place, create your first draft. As you write, embed cultural
context and explain the significance of your artifact in a way that is
relatable and meaningful to your audience. Like Du Bois, try to use
figurative language, such as similes or personification, in your
description, and include the relevant sensory elements of the artifact:
its appearance, taste, smell, sound, and feel. See [Print or Textual
Analysis: What You Read](#) for definitions and examples of some
figurative language, or consult [this site](#). Consider using a graphic
organizer like [\#](#) as a guide. Add more outer circles if needed, and
be mindful of writing in a way that it is accessible and inclusive.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Remember that your first draft is just a starting point. The most
important thing is to get your ideas on paper. This draft can be
considered a test of sorts---one that determines what should and should
not appear in the final paper.

Consider the following sensory description of Broadway in New York,
written by British novelist Charles Dickens (1812--1870) in his book
*American Notes for General Circulation* (1842). *What does Dickens, as
a British observer, note about this street in America? How does he use
language to convey what he sees, hears, and smells? In what ways does he
use language to convey a British viewpoint?*

Warm weather! The sun strikes upon our heads at this open window, as
though its rays were concentrated through a burning-glass; but the day
is in its zenith, and the season an unusual one. Was there ever such a
sunny street as this Broadway! The pavement stones are polished with the
tread of feet until they shine again; the red bricks of the houses might
be yet in the dry, hot kilns; and the roofs of those omnibuses look as
though, if water were poured on them, they would hiss and smoke, and
smell like half-quenched fires. No stint of omnibuses here! Half-a-dozen
have gone by within as many minutes. Plenty of hackney cabs and coaches
too; gigs, phaetons, large-wheeled tilburies, and private
carriages---rather of a clumsy make, and not very different from the
public vehicles, but built for the heavy roads beyond the city pavement.
. . . \[C\]oachmen . . . in straw hats, black hats, white hats, glazed
caps, fur caps; in coats of drab, black, brown, green, blue, nankeen,
striped jean and linen; and there, in that one instance (look while it
passes, or it will be too late), in suits of livery. Some southern
republican that, who puts his blacks in uniform, and swells with Sultan
pomp and power. Yonder, where that phaeton with the well-clipped pair of
grays has stopped---standing at their heads now---is a Yorkshire groom,
who has not been very long in these parts, and looks sorrowfully round
for a companion pair of top-boots, which he may traverse the city half a
year without meeting. Heaven save the ladies, how they dress! We have
seen more colours in these ten minutes, than we should have seen
elsewhere, in as many days. What various parasols! what rainbow silks
and satins! what pinking of thin stockings, and pinching of thin shoes,
and fluttering of ribbons and silk tassels, and display of rich cloaks
with gaudy hoods and linings! The young gentlemen are fond, you see, of
turning down their shirt-collars and cultivating their whiskers,
especially under the chin; but they cannot approach the ladies in their
dress or bearing, being, to say the truth, humanity of quite another
sort. Byrons of the desk and counter, pass on, and let us see what kind
of men those are behind ye: those two labourers in holiday clothes, of
whom one carries in his hand a crumpled scrap of paper from which he
tries to spell out a hard name, while the other looks about for it on
all the doors and windows.

*Now, how might Dickens go on to provide context and make connections
between British and American cultures so that readers understand both
more keenly?* Although *American Notes* is generally critical of the
United States, this description creates a positive mood, as if Dickens
recognizes something of home during his visit to Broadway---a cultural
artifact. This recognition suggests that moments of unexpected joy can
create connections between cultures.

#  {#sect-00010}

One of the most helpful parts of the writing process can be soliciting
input from a peer reviewer. This input will be particularly helpful for
this assignment if the peer reviewer is not a member of the culture you
are writing about. An outsider's view will help you determine whether
you have included appropriate cultural context. Peer reviewers can use
the following sentence starters to provide feedback.

One piece of your writing I found meaningful was \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

Something new I learned about your culture is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_; you
explained this well by \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

Something I was confused by was \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_; I don't understand
this because \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

A major point that I think needs more detail or explanation is
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

In my opinion, the purpose of your paper is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

To me, it seems that your audience is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

I would describe the voice of your piece as \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

I think you could better build cultural context by \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

#  {#sect-00011}

Writing is a recursive process; you will push forward, step back, and
repeat steps multiple times as your ideas develop and change. As you
reread, you may want to add, delete, reorder, or otherwise change your
draft. This response is natural. You may need to return to the
brainstorming process to mine for new ideas or organizational
principles.

As you reread and prepare for revisions, focus on the voice you have
used. *If a friend were to read your draft, could they "hear" you in
it?* If not, work on revising to create a more natural cadence and tone.
Another area of focus should be to explain cultural context and build
cultural bridges. Use your peer reviewer's feedback to develop a piece
that will be meaningful to your audience.

While describing your artifact is likely a deeply personal endeavor, an
important part of writing is to consider your audience. Composition
offers a unique opportunity to build and share cultural understanding.
One way to achieve this goal is by using anti-racist and inclusive
language. Try to view your composition from outside of your own
experience.

Is any language or are any ideas harmful or offensive to other cultures?

Are you using the language of preference for a specified group?

Can people of various abilities read and understand your writing?

One overarching strategy you can use for anti-racist revision is to
constantly question commonly used words and phrases. For example, the
word *Eskimo* is a European term used to describe people living in the
Arctic without regard for differentiation. The term was later used to
describe a popular frozen treat known as an *Eskimo pie*. Today, the
term is considered offensive to Inuit communities---Indigenous people
living in Alaska, Canada, and Greenland. You can also make yourself
aware of the evolving preferences for language use. For example, the
term *Negro* gave way to *African American*, which is now giving way to
the term *Black*. Finally, consider the use of the word *see*, for
example, to mean "to understand": *Do you see what I mean?* Is the use
of *see* in this way inclusive of a visually impaired person who may be
reading your text? To start, determine one or two places to include
anti-racist or inclusive language or ideas in your writing, and build
those into your piece.
