m00079

4dc8d3dd-033b-402d-8155-e99ce278c224

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Distinguish between fact and opinion.

Recognize bias in reading and in yourself.

Ask critical thinking questions to explore an idea for a report.

Knowledge in the social and natural sciences and technical fields is
often focused on data and ideas that can be verified by observing,
measuring, and testing. Accordingly, writers in these fields place high
value on neutral and objective case analysis and inferences based on the
careful examination of data. Put another way, writers describe and
analyze results as they understand them. Likewise, writers in these
fields avoid subjectivity, including personal opinions, speculations,
and bias. As the writer of an analytical report, you need to know the
difference between fact and opinion, be able to identify bias, and think
critically and analytically.

# Distinguishing Fact from Opinion {#sect-00002}

An analytical report provides information based on facts. Put simply,
facts are statements that can be proven or whose truth can be inferred.

It may be difficult to distinguish fact from opinion or allegation. As a
writer, use a critical eye to examine what you read. The following are
examples of factual statements:

Article I, Section 1 of the U.S. Constitution specifies that the
legislative branch of the government consists of the Senate and the
House of Representatives.

The school board voted to approve the administration's proposal.

Facts that use numbers are called statistics. Some numbers are stated
directly:

The earth's average land and ocean surface temperature in March 2020 was
2.09 degrees Fahrenheit higher than the average surface temperature
during the 20th century.

The total number of ballots cast in the 2020 presidential election was
approximately 159 million.

The survey results showed that 45 percent of first-year students at this
university attended every class, whether in person or online.

Other numbers are implied:

Mercury is the planet closest to the sun.

College tuition and fees have risen in the past decade.

Factual statements such as those above stand in contrast to opinions,
which are statements of belief or value. Opinions form the basis of
claims that are supported by evidence in argumentative writing, but they
should be avoided in informative and analytical writing. Here are two
statements of opinion about an increase in college tuition and fees:

Although tuition and fees have risen, the value of a college education
is worth the cost.

The increase in college tuition and fees over the past 10 years has
placed an unreasonably heavy financial burden on students.

Both statements indicate that the writer will make an argument. In the
first, the writer will defend the increases in college tuition and fees.
In the second, the writer will argue that the increases in tuition and
fees have made college too expensive. In both arguments, the writer will
support the argument with factual evidence. See [Proposal: Writing about
Problems and Solutions](#) for more information about fact and opinion.

Want to know more about facts? Read the blog post [Fact-Checking 101](#)
by Laura McClure, posted to the TED-Ed website.

# Recognizing Bias {#sect-00003}

In addition to distinguishing between fact and opinion, it is important
to recognize bias. Bias is commonly defined as a preconceived opinion
about something---a subject, an idea, a person, or a group of people. As
the writer of a report, you will learn to recognize bias in yourself and
in the information you gather.

## Bias in What You Read {#sect-00004}

Some writing is intentionally biased and intended to persuade, such as
the editorials and opinion pieces described above. However, a report and
the evidence on which it is based should not be heavily biased. Bias
becomes a problem when a source you believe to be neutral, objective,
and trustworthy presents information that attempts to sway your opinion.
*[Identifying Bias](#),* posted by Tyler Rablin, is a helpful guide to
recognizing bias.

As you consider sources for your report, the following tips can also
help you spot bias and read critically:

Determine the writer's purpose.

Is the writer simply informing you or trying to persuade you?

Research the author.

Is the writer known for taking a side on the topic of the writing? Is
the writer considered an expert?

Distinguish between fact and opinion.

Take note of the number of facts and opinions throughout the source.

Pay attention to the language and what the writer emphasizes.

Does the author use emotionally loaded, inflammatory words or
descriptions intended to sway readers? What do the title, introduction,
and any headings tell you about the author's approach to the subject?

Read multiple sources on the topic.

Learn whether the source is leaving out or glossing over important
information and credible views.

Look critically at the images and any media that support the writing.

Do they reinforce positive or negative aspects of the subject?

## Bias in Yourself {#sect-00005}

Most individuals bring what psychologists call cognitive bias to their
interactions with information or with other people. Cognitive bias
influences the way people gather and process new information. As you
research information for a report, also be aware of confirmation bias.
This is the tendency to seek out and accept information that supports
(or confirms) a belief you already have and may cause you to ignore or
dismiss information that challenges that belief. A related bias is the
false consensus effect, which is the tendency to overestimate the extent
to which other people agree with your beliefs.

For example, perhaps you believe strongly that college tuition is too
high and that tuition should be free at the public colleges and
universities in your state. With that belief, you are likely to be more
receptive to facts and statistics showing that tuition-free college
benefits students by boosting graduation rates and improving financial
security after college, in part because the sources may seem more
mainstream. However, if you believe strongly that tuition should *not*
be free, you are likely to be more receptive to facts and statistics
showing that students who don't pay for college are less likely to be
serious about school and take longer to graduate---again, because the
sources may seem more mainstream.

# Asking Critical Questions about a Topic for a Report {#sect-00006}

As you consider a topic for a report, note the ideas that occur to you,
interesting information you read, and what you already know. Answer the
following questions about potential topics to help you understand a
topic in a suitably analytical framework for a report.

What is/was the cause of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_?

What is/was the effect of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_?

How does/did \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ compare or contrast with another similar
event, idea, or item?

What makes/made \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ a problem?

What are/were some possible solutions to \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_?

What beliefs do I have about \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_?

What aspects of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ do I need to learn more about to write
a report about it?

In the report that appears later in this chapter, student Trevor Garcia
analyzes the U.S. response to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. Trevor
began thinking about his topic with the question *What was the U.S.
response to the COVID-19 pandemic?* Because he had lived through 2020,
he was able to draw upon personal experience: his school closed, his
mother was laid off, and his family's finances were tight. As he
researched his question, he moved beyond the information he gathered
from his own experiences and discovered that the United States had
failed in several key areas. He then answered the questions below to
arrive at an analytical framework:

What was the cause of the poor U.S. response to the COVID-19 pandemic in
2020?

What was the effect of the U.S. response to the COVID-19 pandemic in
2020?

How did the U.S. response to the COVID-19 pandemic compare/contrast with
the responses of other countries?

What are some possible solutions to the U.S. response to the COVID-19
pandemic?

What do I already believe about the U.S. response to the COVID-19
pandemic?

What aspects of the U.S. response to the COVID-19 pandemic do I need to
learn more about?

For his report, Trevor chose to focus on the first question: *What was
the cause of the poor U.S. response to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020?*
