m00080

fdb367b8-3cbb-4336-a64a-901c8debade6

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Define the term

myth buster

and its connection to field research.

Answer questions about what it means to investigate and report
information.

Gather information from a biographical text.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

"As a journalist, I search for the truth."
::::

# Myth-Buster {#sect-00002}

Self-described "myth buster by trade" Barbara Ehrenreich (b. 1941) has
tackled many myths during her years as an activist and a writer, most
often confronting widely held beliefs related to health and wealth.

Ehrenreich was born in 1941 in Butte, Montana, the daughter of a copper
miner who finished college after she and her siblings were born. The
family moved frequently when Ehrenreich was young and finally settled in
Los Angeles. Ehrenreich attended Reed College in Portland, Oregon, and
went to graduate school at Rockefeller University in New York City,
where she earned a PhD in cell biology. Ehrenreich became involved in
the women's health movement in the 1970s and at that point decided to
become a full-time writer. Her work life settled into three tracks:
"journalism, . . . book-length projects on subjects, . . . \[and\]
activism." Over her long career, she has written for magazines and
newspapers and has published more than 20 books, the most recent of
which is *Natural Causes: An Epidemic of Wellness, the Certainty of
Dying, and Killing Ourselves to Live Longer* (2018).

Ehrenreich is perhaps best known for *Nickel and Dimed: On (Not) Getting
By in America* (2001), a first-person account of her three-month
experiment trying to make ends meet on minimum wage. She went
undercover, leaving her middle-class home behind, and moved around the
United States from Florida to Maine to Minnesota. Ehrenreich worked as a
waitress, hotel maid, house cleaner, nursing home aide, and Walmart
salesperson. On the wages and tips she made at her various jobs, she
attempted to find healthy food, health care, and affordable housing in
trailer parks and residential hotels.

In *Nickel and Dimed*, Ehrenreich busts the myth that poor people have
figured out how to live well on less money than middle-class people. No
such "secret economies" exist, Ehrenreich writes. Instead, poor people
pay "a host of special costs," whether for renting a room by the week
because they cannot save up two months' rent to get an apartment, buying
restaurant food because the weekly room doesn't have a stove, or going
to the emergency room for a toothache because they can't afford to go to
the dentist.

As a piece of writing, *Nickel and Dimed* falls into the genre of
memoir. However, the book is also a report; Ehrenreich conducted
extensive on-the-ground field research, recording the tasks she
performed at her jobs, interactions with managers, and conversations
with coworkers about their lives. She recorded her findings when she was
not working. Although some readers have criticized Ehrenreich for not
being honest about her background and education, most have praised the
light she shines on the other side of American prosperity---the people
who work hard but who never manage to get ahead. Her work as a "myth
buster" to expose the hardships faced by poor working people in America
illustrates the problem of accepting opinions as facts.

In the introduction to *Nickel and Dimed*, Ehrenreich describes the
research methods. She also discusses *Nickel and Dimed* on [C-Span](#).

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00003}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
