m00081

16747226-c3e3-4f00-8c7d-29362cf7eabe

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Determine purpose and audience expectations for an analytical report.

Identify key features of informal and formal reports.

Define key terms and characteristics of an analytical report.

It is important to understand the purpose of your report, the
expectations of the audience, any specific formatting requirements, and
the types of evidence you can use.

# Defining a Specific Purpose {#sect-00002}

Your purpose is your reason for writing. The purpose of a report is to
inform; as the writer, you are tasked with providing information and
explaining it to readers. Many topics are suitable for informative
writing---how to find a job, the way a disease spreads within a
population, or the items on which people spend the most money. Some
textbooks are examples of informative writing, as is much of the
reporting you find on reputable news sites.

An analytical report is a type of report. Its purpose is to present and
analyze information. An assignment for an analytical report will likely
include words such as *analyze*, *compare*, *contrast*, *cause*, and/or
*discuss*, indicating the specific purpose of the report. Here are a few
examples:

Discuss and

analyze

potential career paths with strong employment prospects for young
adults.

Compare and contrast

proposals to reduce binge drinking among college students.

Analyze the

Cause-and-effect

of injuries on construction sites and the effects of efforts to reduce
workplace injuries.

Discuss the

Effect

of the 1965 Voting Rights Act on voting patterns among U.S. citizens of
color.

Analyze the success and failure of strategies used by the major
political parties to encourage citizens to vote.

# Tuning In to Audience Expectations {#sect-00003}

The audience for your report consists of the people who will read it or
who could read it. *Are you writing for your instructor? For your
classmates? For other students and teachers in professional fields or
academic disciplines? For people in your community?* Whoever your
readers are, they expect you to do the following:

Have an idea of what they already know about your topic, and adjust your
writing as needed. If readers are new to the topic, they expect you to
provide necessary background information. If they are knowledgeable
about the topic, they will expect you to cover the background quickly.

Provide reliable information in the form of specific facts, statistics,
and examples. Whether you present your own research or information from
other sources, readers expect you to have done your homework in order to
supply trustworthy information.

Define terms, especially if audience members may be unfamiliar with your
topic.

Structure your report in a logical way. It should open with an
introduction that tells readers the subject and should follow a logical
structure.

Adopt an objective stance and neutral tone, free of any bias, personal
feelings, or emotional language. By demonstrating objectivity, you show
respect for your readers' knowledge and intelligence, and you build
credibility and trust, or

ethos

, with them.

Present and cite source information fairly and accurately.

# Informal Reports {#sect-00004}

An informal analytical report will identify a problem, provide factual
information about the problem, and draw conclusions about the
information. An informal report is usually structured like an essay,
with an introduction or summary, body paragraphs, and a conclusion or
recommendations. It will likely feature headings identifying key
sections and be presented in academic essay format, such as [MLA
Documentation and Format](#) or [APA Documentation and Format](#). For
an example of an informal analytical report documented in APA style, see
Trevor Garcia's paper on the U.S. response to COVID-19 in 2020 in the
[Annotated Student Sample](#).

Other types of informal reports include journalism reports. A
traditional journalism report involves a reporter for a news
organization reporting on the day's events---the results of an election,
a political crisis, a plane crash, a celebrity marriage---on TV, on
radio, or in print. An investigative journalism report, on the other
hand, involves reporters doing original research over a period of weeks
or months to uncover significant new information, similar to what
Barbara Ehrenreich did for her book *Nickel and Dimed*. For sample
traditional and investigative journalistic reports, visit the website of
a reliable news organization or publication, such as the *[New York
Times](#)*, the *[Washington Post](#)*, the *[Wall Street Journal](#)*,
the *[Economist](#),* the *[New Yorker](#)*, or the *[Atlantic](#)*.

# Formal Reports {#sect-00005}

Writers in the social sciences, the natural sciences, technical fields,
and business often write formal analytical reports. These include lab
reports, research reports, and proposals.

Formal reports present findings and data drawn from experiments,
surveys, and research and often end with a conclusion based on an
analysis of these findings and data. These reports frequently include
visuals such as graphs, bar charts, pie charts, photographs, or diagrams
that are captioned and referred to in the text. Formal reports always
cite sources of information, often using [APA Documentation and
Format](#), used in the examples in this chapter, or a similar style.

If you are assigned a formal report in a class, follow the instructions
carefully. Your instructor will likely explain the assignment in detail
and provide explicit directions and guidelines for the research you will
need to do (including any permission required by your college or
university if you conduct research on human subjects), how to organize
the information you gather, and how to write and format your report. A
formal report is a complex, highly organized, and often lengthy document
with a specified format and sections usually marked by headings.

Following are the components of a formal analytical report. Depending on
the assignment and the audience, a formal report you write may include
some or all of these parts. For example, a research report following APA
format usually includes a title page, an abstract, headings for
components of the body of the report (methods, results, discussion), and
a references page. Detailed APA guidelines are available online,
including at the [Purdue University Online Writing Lab](#).

## Components of Formal Analytical Reports {#sect-00006}

Letter of transmittal

. When a report is submitted, it is usually accompanied by a letter or
email to the recipient explaining the nature of the report and signed by
those responsible for writing it. Write the letter of transmittal when
the report is finished and ready for submission.

Title page

. The title page includes the title of the report, the name(s) of the
author(s), and the date it was written or submitted. The report title
should describe the report simply, directly, and clearly and should not
try to be too clever. For example,

The New Student Writing Project: A Two-Year Report

is a clear, descriptive title, whereas

Write On, Students!

is not.

Acknowledgments

. If other people and/or organizations contributed to the report,
include a page or paragraph thanking them.

Table of contents

. For long reports (10 pages or more), create a table of contents to
help readers navigate easily. List the major components and subsections
of the report and the pages on which they begin.

Executive summary

or

abstract

. The executive summary or abstract is a paragraph that highlights the
findings of the report. The purpose of this section is to present
information in the quickest, most concentrated, and most economical way
possible to be useful to readers. Write this section after you have
completed the rest of the report.

Introduction

or

background

. The introduction provides necessary background information to help
readers understand the report. This section also indicates what
information is included in the report.

Methods

. Especially in the social sciences, the natural sciences, and technical
disciplines, the methods or procedures section outlines how you gathered
information and from what sources, such as experiments, surveys, library
research, interviews, and so on.

Results

. In the results section, you summarize the data you have collected from
your research, explain your method of analysis, and present this
information in detail, often in a table, graph, or chart.

Discussion

or

Conclusion

. In this section, you interpret the results and present the conclusions
of your research. This section also may be called "Discussion of
Findings."

Recommendations

. In this section, you explain what you believe should be done in
response to your research findings.

References

and

bibliography

. The references section includes every source you cited in the report.
The bibliography contains, in addition to those cited in the report,
sources that readers can consult to learn more.

Appendix

. An appendix (plural:

appendices

) includes documents that are related to the report or contain
information that can be culled but are not deemed central to
understanding the report.

The following links take you to sample formal reports written by
students and offer tips from librarians posted by colleges and
universities in the United States. These samples may help you better
understand what is involved in writing a formal analytical report.

Product review report

, from the University/College Library of Broward College and Florida
Atlantic University

Business report

, from Wright State University

Technical report

, from the University of Utah

Lab report

, from Hamilton College

Field report

, from the University of Southern California

# Exploring the Genre {#sect-00007}

The following are key terms and characteristics related to reports.

Audience

: Readers of a report or any piece of writing.

Bias

: A preconceived opinion about something, such as a subject, an idea, a
person, or a group of people. As a reader, be attentive to potential
bias in sources; as a writer, be attentive to your own biases.

Body

: The main part of a report between the introduction and the conclusion.
The body of an analytical report consists of paragraphs in which the
writer presents and analyzes key information.

Citation

of sources: References in the written text to sources that a writer has
used in a report.

Conclusion

and/or

recommendation

: The last part of a report. In this section, the writer summarizes the
significance of the information in the report or offers
recommendations---or both.

Critical thinking

: The ability to look beneath the surface of words and images to
analyze, interpret, and evaluate them.

Ethos

: The sense that the writer or other authority is trustworthy and
credible; also known as

ethical appeal

.

Evidence

: Statements of fact, statistics, examples, and expert opinions that
support the writer's points.

Facts

: Statements whose truth can be proved or verified and that serve as
evidence in a report.

Introduction

: The first section of a report after any front matter, such as an
abstract or table of contents. In an analytical report, the writer
introduces the topic to be addressed and often presents the thesis at
the end of the introduction.

Logos

: The use of facts as evidence to appeal to an audience's logical and
rational thinking; also known as

logical appeal

.

Objective stance

: Writing in a way that is free from bias, personal feelings, and
emotional language. An objective stance is especially important in
report writing.

Purpose

: The reason for writing. The purpose of an analytical report is to
examine a subject or issue closely, often from multiple perspectives, by
looking at causes and effects, by comparing and contrasting, or by
examining problems and proposing solutions.

Statistics

: Factual statements that include numbers and often serve as evidence in
a report.

Synthesis

: Making connections among and combining ideas, facts, statistics, and
other information.

Thesis

: The central or main idea that you will convey in your report. The
thesis is often referred to as the central claim in argumentative
writing.

Thesis statement

: A declarative sentence (sometimes two) that states the topic, the
angle you are taking, and the aspects of the topic you will cover. For a
report, a thesis indicates and limits the scope of the report.
