m00082

43e4e091-cca7-4218-8878-bf0a57b8b9c5

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify the genre conventions of an informal analytical report.

Analyze the organizational structure of a report and how writers develop
ideas.

Recognize how writers use evidence and objectivity to build credibility.

Identify sources of evidence within a text and in source citations.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Introduction {#sect-00002}

The analytical report that follows was written by a student, Trevor
Garcia, for a first-year composition course. Trevor's assignment was to
research and analyze a contemporary issue in terms of its causes or
effects. He chose to analyze the causes behind the large numbers of
COVID-19 infections and deaths in the United States in 2020. The report
is structured as an essay, and its format is informal.

# Successes and Failures {#sect-00003}

With more than 83 million cases and 1.8 million deaths at the end of
2020, COVID-19 has turned the world upside down. By the end of 2020, the
United States led the world in the number of cases, at more than 20
million infections and nearly 350,000 deaths. In comparison, the
second-highest number of cases was in India, which at the end of 2020
had less than half the number of COVID-19 cases despite having a
population four times greater than the U.S. ("COVID-19 Coronavirus
Pandemic," 2021). How did the United States come to have the world's
worst record in this pandemic? An examination of the U.S. response shows
that a reduction of experts in key positions and programs, inaction that
led to equipment shortages, and inconsistent policies were three major
causes of the spread of the virus and the resulting deaths.

Introduction. *Informal reports follow essay structure and open with an
overview.*

Statistics as Evidence. *The writer gives statistics about infection
rates and numbers of deaths; a comparison provides context.*

Source Citation in APA Style: No Author. *A web page without a named
author is cited by the title and the year.*

Thesis Statement. *The rhetorical question leads to the thesis statement
in the last sentence of the introduction. The thesis statement previews
the organization and indicates the purpose---to analyze the causes of
the U.S. response to the virus.*

## Reductions in Expert Personnel and Preparedness Programs {#sect-00004}

Headings. *This heading and those that follow mark sections of the
report.*

Body. *The three paragraphs under this heading support the first main
point in the thesis statement.*

Epidemiologists and public health officials in the United States had
long known that a global pandemic was possible.

Topic Sentence. *The paragraph opens with a sentence stating the topic.
The rest of this paragraph and the two that follow develop the topic
chronologically.*

In 2016, the National Security Council (NSC) published *Playbook for
Early Response to High-Consequence Emerging Infectious Disease Threats
and Biological Incidents*, a 69-page document on responding to diseases
spreading within and outside of the United States. On January 13, 2017,
the joint transition teams of outgoing president Barack Obama and then
president-elect Donald Trump performed a pandemic preparedness exercise
based on the playbook; however, it was never adopted by the incoming
administration (Goodman & Schulkin, 2020). A year later, in February
2018, the Trump administration began to cut funding for the Prevention
and Public Health Fund at the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, leaving key positions unfilled. Other individuals who were
fired or resigned in 2018 were the homeland security adviser, whose
portfolio included global pandemics; the director for medical and
biodefense preparedness; and the top official in charge of a pandemic
response. None of them were replaced, thus leaving the White House with
no senior person who had experience in public health (Goodman &
Schulkin, 2020). Experts voiced concerns, among them Luciana Borio,
director of medical and biodefense preparedness at the NSC, who spoke at
a symposium marking the centennial of the 1918 influenza pandemic in May
2018: "The threat of pandemic flu is the number one health security
concern," she said. "Are we ready to respond? I fear the answer is no"
(Sun, 2018, final para.).

Audience. The writer assumes that his readers have a strong grasp of
government and agencies within the government.

Synthesis. *The paragraph synthesizes factual evidence from two sources
and cites them in APA style.*

Expert Quotation as Supporting Evidence. *The expert's credentials are
given, her exact words are placed in quotation marks, and the source is
cited in parentheses.*

Source Citation in APA Style: No Page Numbers. *Because the source of
the quotation has no page numbers, the specific paragraph within the
source ("final para."; alternatively, "para. 18") is provided in the
parenthetical citation.*

Cuts continued in 2019, among them a maintenance contract for
ventilators in the federal emergency supply and PREDICT, a U.S. agency
for international development designed to identify and prevent pandemics
(Goodman & Schulkin, 2020). In July 2019, the White House eliminated the
position of an American public health official in Beijing, China, who
was working with China's disease control agency to help detect and
contain infectious diseases. The first case of COVID-19 emerged in China
four months later, on November 17, 2019.

Development of First Main Point. This paragraph continues the
chronological development of the first point, using a transitional
sentence and evidence to discuss the year 2019.

After the first U.S. coronavirus case was confirmed in 2020, the
secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) was named
to lead a task force on a response, but after several months, he was
replaced when then vice president Mike Pence was officially charged with
leading the White House Coronavirus Task Force (Ballhaus & Armour,
2020). Experts who remained, including Dr. Deborah Birx and Dr. Anthony
Fauci of the National Institutes of Health, were sidelined. Turnover of
personnel in related government departments and agencies continued
throughout 2020, leaving the country without experts in key positions to
lead the pandemic response.

Development of First Main Point. This paragraph continues the
chronological development of the first point, using a transitional
sentence and evidence to discuss the start of the pandemic in 2020.

## Inaction and Equipment Shortages {#sect-00005}

Body. *The three paragraphs under this heading support the second main
point in the thesis statement.*

In January and February of 2020, the president's daily brief included
more than a dozen detailed warnings, based on wire intercepts, computer
intercepts, and satellite images by the U.S. intelligence community
(Miller & Nakashima, 2020). Although senior officials began to assemble
a task force, no direct action was taken until mid-March.

Topic Sentences. *The paragraph opens with two sentences stating the
topic that is developed in the following paragraphs.*

The stockpile of medical equipment and personal protective equipment was
dangerously low before the pandemic began. Although the federal
government had paid \$9.8 million to manufacturers in 2018 and 2019 to
develop and produce protective masks, by April 2020 the government had
not yet received a single mask (Swaine, 2020). Despite the low
stockpile, a request by the head of the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) in early 2020 to begin contacting companies about possible
shortages of necessary medical equipment, including personal protective
equipment, was denied. This decision was made to avoid alarming the
industry and the public and to avoid giving the impression that the
administration was not prepared for the pandemic (Ballhaus & Armour,
2020).

Topic Sentence. *The paragraph opens with a sentence stating the topic
that is developed in the paragraph.*

Objective Stance. *The writer presents evidence (facts, statistics, and
examples) in mostly neutral, unemotional language, which builds
trustworthiness, or* ethos*, with readers.*

Synthesis. *The paragraph synthesizes factual evidence from two
sources.*

When former President Trump declared a national emergency on March 13,
federal agencies began placing bulk orders for masks and other medical
equipment. These orders led to critical shortages throughout the nation.
In addition, states were instructed to acquire their own equipment and
found themselves bidding against each other for the limited supplies
available, leading one head of a coronavirus team composed of consulting
and private equity firms to remark that "the federal stockpile was . . .
supposed to be *our* stockpile. It's not supposed to be states'
stockpiles that they then use" (Goodman & Schulkin, 2020, April 2,
2020).

## Policy Decisions {#sect-00006}

Body. *The paragraph under this heading addresses the third main point
in the thesis statement.*

Policy decisions, too, hampered the U.S. response to the pandemic.

Topic Sentence. *The paragraph opens with a sentence stating the topic
that is developed in the paragraph.*

Although the HHS and NSC recommended stay-at-home directives on February
14, directives and guidelines for social distancing were not announced
until March 16, and guidelines for mask wearing were inconsistent and
contradictory (Goodman & Schulkin, 2020). Implementing the
recommendations was left to the discretion of state governors, resulting
in uneven stay-at-home orders, business closures, school closures, and
mask mandates from state to state. The lack of a consistent message from
the federal government not only delegated responsibility to state and
local governments but also encouraged individuals to make their own
choices, further hampering containment efforts. Seeing government
officials and politicians without masks, for example, led many people to
conclude that masks were unnecessary. Seeing large groups of people
standing together at political rallies led people to ignore social
distancing in their own lives.

Synthesis. *The paragraph synthesizes factual evidence from a source and
examples drawn from the writer's observation.*

## Conclusion {#sect-00007}

Although the first cases of COVID-19 were detected in the United States
in January, genetic researchers later determined that the viral strain
responsible for sustained transmission of the disease did not enter the
country until around February 13 (Branswell, 2020), providing further
evidence that the failed U.S. response to the pandemic could have been
prevented. Cuts to public health staff reduced the number of experts in
leadership positions. Inaction in the early months of the pandemic led
to critical shortages of medical equipment and supplies. Mixed messages
and inconsistent policies undermined efforts to control and contain the
disease. Unfortunately, the response to the disease in 2020 cannot be
changed, but 2021 looks brighter. Most people who want the
vaccine---nonexistent at the beginning of the pandemic and unavailable
until recently---will have received it by the end of 2021. Americans
will have experienced two years of living with the coronavirus, and
everyone will have been affected in some way.

Conclusion. *The report concludes with a restatement of the main points
given in the thesis and points to the future.*

## References {#sect-00008}

Ballhaus, R., & Armour, S. (2020, April 22). Health chief's early
missteps set back coronavirus response. *Wall Street Journal*.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/health-chiefs-early-missteps-set-back-coronavirus-response-11587570514

Branswell, H. (2020, May 26). *New research rewrites history of when
COVID-19 took off in the U.S.---and points to missed chances to stop
it*. STAT.
https://www.statnews.com/2020/05/26/new-research-rewrites-history-of-when-covid-19-arrived-in-u-s-and-points-to-missed-chances-to-stop-it/

*COVID-19 coronavirus pandemic*. (2021, January 13). Worldometer.
https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/#countries

Goodman, R., & Schulkin, D. (2020, November 3). *Timeline of the
coronavirus pandemic and U.S. response*. Just Security.
https://www.justsecurity.org/69650/timeline-of-the-coronavirus-pandemic-and-u-s-response/

Miller, G., & Nakashima, E. (2020, April 27). President's intelligence
briefing book repeatedly cited virus threat. *Washington Post*.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/presidents-intelligence-briefing-book-repeatedly-cited-virus-threat/2020/04/27/ca66949a-8885-11ea-ac8a-fe9b8088e101_story.html

Sun, L. H. (2018, May 10). Top White House official in charge of
pandemic response exits abruptly. *Washington Post*.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/to-your-health/wp/2018/05/10/top-white-house-official-in-charge-of-pandemic-response-exits-abruptly/

Swaine, J. (2020, April 3). Federal government spent millions to ramp up
mask readiness, but that isn't helping now. *Washington Post*.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/investigations/federal-government-spent-millions-to-ramp-up-mask-readiness-but-that-isnt-helping-now/2020/04/03/d62dda5c-74fa-11ea-a9bd-9f8b593300d0_story.html

References Page in APA Style. *All sources cited in the text of the
report, and only those sources, are listed in alphabetical order with
full publication information. See the Handbook for more on APA
documentation style.*

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00009}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
