m00084

a7898fdc-0352-49dc-87dc-3a958cf45efc

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Distinguish between essential and nonessential information in sentences.

Use commas for clearer, more effective sentences.

A comma is a mark of separation. It alerts readers to a brief pause or
pauses within a sentence that is part of your analytical report.

# Nonessential and Essential information {#sect-00002}

Nonessential information refers to information within a sentence that is
*not* necessary for the reader to understand its meaning. Essential
information refers to information within a sentence that *is* necessary
for the reader to understand its meaning.

## Nonessential Information {#sect-00003}

Placing commas around a word or group of words within a sentence usually
indicates that the information is not necessary for readers to
understand the sentence's meaning. In the example below, the underlined
words refer to and explain the phrase *current math curriculum*, but
they can be removed without changing the meaning of the sentence: the
math curriculum currently in use isn't meeting current needs. The
information is interesting and perhaps useful, but it is "extra" and
does not change the basic meaning of the sentence.

The current math curriculum*, which was adopted by the school district
10 years ago,* no longer meets the needs of the students.

## Essential Information {#sect-00004}

Certain words in a sentence are often necessary for readers to
understand its meaning. In the example below, the word *current* was
removed from between the words *The* and *math* and replaced by the
underlined words that tell readers *which* curriculum no longer meets
students' needs. It is essential because without it, confusion may arise
about which math curriculum no longer meets students' needs.

The math curriculum *that the district adopted 10 years ago* no longer
meets the needs of the students.

# To Comma or Not to Comma? {#sect-00005}

Place commas around nonessential information, but not around essential
information. You can test whether information is nonessential by
removing the information. If the meaning of the sentence is unchanged,
the information is nonessential. If the meaning becomes too general or
changes in any way, the information is essential. Often, nonessential
information is introduced with the word *which* and essential
information with *that*.

## Place Commas around Nonessential Information {#sect-00006}

Place commas around information that is not essential to the meaning of
a sentence, as illustrated in the following sentences:

The entire math department

, which consists of 16 teachers and 7 staff members,

has requested a review of the curriculum.

The department chair

, who has led the math department for 11 years,

has agreed to the teachers' request.

The curriculum will become effective in June

, when the school year is finished

.

## Do Not Place Commas around Essential Information {#sect-00007}

Do not place commas around information that is essential to the meaning
of a sentence, as illustrated in the following sentences:

According to the department chair, the math curriculum needs to focus on
skills

that students need after high school graduation

.

The math teachers

who teach Algebra 1 and Algebra 2

have requested a review of the curriculum.

The teachers are concerned

that students are not retaining what they have learned

.

The department has consulted the curriculum expert

Malcolm Green

.

See [Punctuation](#) for more on commas.

# Practice Using Commas {#sect-00008}

Read each of the following sentences. Decide whether the underlined
portion of each sentence is nonessential or essential. Place commas
before, after, or around the nonessential information as appropriate.

The department has consulted the curriculum expert Malcolm Green

whose textbook is widely used

.

Two members of the math department

Janelle Brady and Tye Lavalle

are retiring next year.

The textbooks

that are now in use

are outdated.

Students have given feedback on the online classes

that have replaced in-person classes

.

The math department now offers more evening classes

which attract more students

and fewer summer classes.

Several instructors

who teach math

also teach computer science classes.
