m00086

f9cf1961-8020-4a47-a3ef-b9c47c332718

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Explain the role of discipline-specific and technical language in
various situations and contexts.

Implement purposeful shifts in voice, tone, level of formality, and word
choice.

Pursue options for publishing your report.

Proficient report writers in all academic disciplines and professions
use language that is clear, direct, economical, and conventional.
Moreover, they often use a specialized vocabulary to convey information
to others in their field. These technical words allow specialists to
communicate precisely and efficiently with other experts, but such terms
can be confusing to nonspecialists. The following guidelines can help
you shape the language of a report in a social science, natural science,
or technical field:

Define disciplinary and technical terms.

For example, in a report about computer storage, you might need to
define terms such as

kilobyte

,

terabyte

,

gigabyte

, and

megabyte

. In the following example, the writer defines these terms

.

Computer storage space is measured in units called kilobytes (KB). Each
KB equals 1,024 "bytes," or approximately 1000 single typewriter
characters. Therefore, one KB equals about 180 English words, or a
little less than half of a single-spaced typed page, or maybe three
minutes of fast typing. One terabyte (TB) is 1024 gigabytes (GB), one GB
is 1024 megabytes (MB), and one MB is 1024 KB.

Write out full names the first time you use them, followed by
abbreviations or acronyms in parentheses.

Then you can use the abbreviation or acronym throughout the rest of the
report. For example, write out

U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)

or

Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)

the first time you refer to it, and use

USDA

or

OSHA

subsequently. In the previous example about computer storage, the writer
used the abbreviations for KB, TB, GB, and MB after writing out the full
words. The sentence below, from Trevor Garcia's report, gives another
example:

After the first U.S. coronavirus case was confirmed in 2020, the
secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) was named
to lead a task force on a response, but after several months he was
replaced when then vice president Mike Pence was officially charged with
leading the White House Coronavirus Task Force (Ballhaus & Armour,
2020).

Write in third-person point of view.

Third-person

point of view

will help you use objective language that is free of value judgments and
emotional responses, as demonstrated in the following examples:

The causes of obesity are complex and involve multiple factors,
including genetics, underlying health conditions, cultural attitudes
toward food and exercise, access to healthy food and health care, safe
outdoor spaces, income, and leisure time.

The survey respondents self-identified as cisgender female (153),
cisgender male (131), gender nonbinary (12), and transgender (4).

Consider occasional use of the passive voice.

Traditionally, writers in the sciences and technical fields have used
the passive voice for objectivity and neutrality. In the

passive voice

, the subject of the sentence is acted upon; in the

active voice

, the subject acts. Increasingly, scientific and technical writers use
the active voice in the introduction and conclusion sections of reports,
which are more interpretative. They use the passive voice in the method
and results sections, which are more straight-up reporting.

Notice that by using the passive voice, the writer is able to avoid
naming the person or group who conducted the survey. The passive voice
is a technique that writers often use when they don't want to make the
name of an individual or group public. See [Clear and Effective
Sentences](#) for more on passive and active voice.

*Passive voice:* A survey of 300 students *was conducted* at a large
state university in the southern United States.

*Active voice:* *We conducted* a survey of 300 students at a large state
university in the southern United States.

Pay attention to the details of meaning, grammar, punctuation, and
mechanics.

Each discipline values precision and correctness, and each has its own
specialized vocabulary for talking about knowledge. Writers are expected
to use terms precisely and to spell them correctly. Your writing will
gain greater respect when it reflects standard grammar, punctuation, and
mechanics.

# Publish Your Report {#sect-00002}

Now that you have completed all stages of your report, you may want to
think about sharing it with students at your school or other colleges.
Your college may have a journal that publishes undergraduate research
work. If so, find out about submitting your work. Also, listed here are
some of the many publications that feature undergraduate student
research. Check them out.

Papers & Publications: Interdisciplinary Journal of Undergraduate
Research

(accepts work from students in the southeastern United States)

Journal of Undergraduate Research

(peer-reviewed undergraduate journal; accepts research work in all
subjects)

Journal of Student Research

(accepts student work from high school through graduate school)

Crossing Borders: A Multidisciplinary Journal of Undergraduate
Scholarship

(published at Kansas State University; accepts student research in all
disciplines from undergraduates throughout the country)

1890: A Journal of Undergraduate Research

(accepts undergraduate works of research, creative writing, poetry,
reviews, and art)
