m00087

fb725b86-d35f-427b-9ccc-dd32d280ddc2

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Write about the development of your composing processes.

Write about how composing processes affect your work.

Write about your objectivity as a writer.

As you complete your report, think critically about your writing
process. Watch *[An Introduction to Reflective Writing](#),* and reflect
on what you created from the first step of discovering ideas to the last
steps of composing and editing the final draft.

# Reflective Task: Lessons Learned {#sect-00002}

As you add your analytical report to your portfolio, write either a
cover letter or a journal entry in which you respond to the following
questions:

How did you choose the topic for your report? Did you have to narrow or
expand it?

What methods did you use to gather ideas about your topic? What outside
sources did you consult to gather information about your topic?

How did you settle on your thesis? Did you rewrite it multiple times?

What strategies did you use to organize your report?

What strategies did you use to develop paragraphs? What difficulties, if
any, did you encounter?

How challenging was it for you to adopt an objective stance? Did you
recognize your own biases? Was it difficult to write in third-person
point of view?

How did input from peers and other readers affect your drafting and
revision processes? What specific constructive criticism did you receive
that helped you?

In what ways was this report easier or harder to write than other papers
you have written?

What could you have done differently to make writing your report easier
or more effective?

# Further Reading {#sect-00003}

The following books are just a few examples of in-depth book-length
reporting.

Boo, Katherine. *Behind the Beautiful Forevers: Life, Death, and Hope in
a Mumbai Undercity*. Random House, 2012.

Desmond, Matthew. *Evicted: Poverty and Profit in the American City*.
Crown, 2016.

Ehrenreich, Barbara. *Nickel and Dimed: On (Not) Getting By in America*.
Metropolitan Books, 2001.

Macy, Beth. *Dopesick: Dealers, Doctors, and the Drug Company That
Addicted America*. Little, Brown, 2018.

Wilkerson, Isabel. *The Warmth of Other Suns: The Epic Story of
America's Great Migration*. Random House, 2010.

# Works Cited {#sect-00004}

"About." *Barbara Ehrenreich*, Hachette Book Group,
www.barbaraehrenreich.com/.

Fowler, H. Ramsey, and Jane E. Aaron. *The Little, Brown Handbook*. 13th
ed., Pearson, 2016.

McClure, Laura. "Fact-Checking 101." *TED-Ed Blog*, TED-Ed, 30 Mar.
2017, blog.ed.ted.com/2017/03/30/factchecking-101/.

"Professional, Technical Writing." *OWL: The Purdue Online Writing Lab*,
Purdue U, 2021,
owl.purdue.edu/owl/subject_specific_writing/professional_technical_writing/index.html.

"Reflective Writing in Education." *Research and Learning Online*,
Monash U,
www.monash.edu/rlo/assignment-samples/education/education-reflective-writing.
