m00001

8ee388fa-11c7-4b23-8e8e-c6f28ecf7b95

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Chances are you already have a great deal of experience with multimodal
composition---that is, writing or creating content by combining
different types of communication. Much of your experience may come from
digital spaces, perhaps even from platforms such as social media that
you don't associate with academics. According to literature examining
adolescent and young adult literacy skills, young adults incorporate a
great deal of multimodal communication---which includes sound, images,
movement, and text---into their everyday lives to express themselves and
connect with others. Social media has no doubt hastened the spread of
multimodal communication, and its prevalence in the world is
unprecedented. Perhaps you have never believed that your experience with
digital and multimodal writing connects to academic composition, but
indeed it does. Just as technology has changed how people interact with
the world, multimodal composition has altered how they create content.
In this chapter, you will learn how to combine your experience in
creating and using multimodal composition with established writing
practices, particularly those used in argumentative writing, to generate
connected content that creates meaning.

Multimodal composition begins where any other composition does: with the
rhetorical situation, or the circumstance of communication in which one
person (the composer) uses communication to influence the perspective of
another (the audience). All multimodal compositions are created for a
specific time and place and a particular audience who views the world in
an explicit and culturally influenced way. As a writer, you make choices
based on the rhetorical situation: context, audience, purpose, genre,
and culture. You consider the strengths and weaknesses of all the
possible means and tools available for reaching your rhetorical goals.
By identifying the audience, determining what you need to tell the
audience, and analyzing the best way to do that (including which types
of media to use), you are empowered to create an effective and targeted
composition.

In many ways, multimodal composition opens a range of possibilities by
offering you any number of tools to make meaning, rather than limiting
you to text alone. For example, a sportswriter might rely heavily on
visuals to engage readers and demonstrate a runner's prowess, or they
might create infographics to relay statistics about the athlete or the
meet itself.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Websites require a balance of text, images, and careful formatting to
present information in ways that are easy to digest and not overwhelming
for the reader. In fact, the most difficult part of this type of
creation may be choosing among the available tools to create meaning
*effectively* without doing too much or too little. In some ways, the
flexibility of websites can make it hard to know where to get
started---or where to end.

This chapter presents a blog post by Alexandra Dapolito Dunn, formerly
of the Environmental Protection Agency. Studying this article and the
components of multimodal writing that Dunn chooses to use will help you
understand how different platforms and rhetorical needs require
different elements of text, media, and modes. Later in the chapter, you
will learn how to address a range of audiences through your own textual
and digital compositions.
