m00002

dd846890-31d7-4ccc-83a2-bab6b263d93c

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Address a range of audiences using a variety of technologies.

Adapt composing processes for a variety of modalities, including textual
and digital compositions.

Match the capacities of different print and electronic environments to
varying rhetorical situations.

The writing genre for this chapter incorporates a variety of modalities.
A genre is a type of composition that encompasses defined features,
follows a style or format, and reflects your purpose as a writer. For
example, given the composition types *romantic comedy*, *poetry*, or
*documentary*, you probably can think easily of features of each of
these composition types. When considering the multimodal genres, you
will discover that genres create conventions (standard ways of doing
things) for categorizing media according to the expectations of the
audience and the way the media will be consumed. Consider film media,
for example; it encompasses genres including drama, documentaries, and
animated shorts, to name a few. Each genre has its own conventions, or
features. When you write or analyze multimodal texts, it is important to
account for genre conventions.

A note on text: typically, when referring to text, people mean written
words. But in multimodal genres, the term *text* can refer to a piece of
communication as a whole, incorporating written words, images, sounds,
and even movement. The following images are examples of multimodal
texts.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

Multimodal genres are uniquely positioned to address audiences through a
variety of modes, or types of communication. These can be identified in
the following categories:

Linguistic text*:* The most common mode for writing, the linguistic mode
includes written or spoken text.

Visuals*:* The visual mode includes anything the reader can see,
including images, colors, lighting, typefaces, lines, shapes, and
backgrounds.

Audio*:* The audio mode includes all types of sound, such as narration,
sound effects, music, silence, and ambient noise.

Spatial*:* Especially important in digital media, the spatial mode
includes spacing, image and text size and position, white space, visual
organization, and alignment.

Gestural*:* The gestural mode includes communication through all kinds
of body language, including movement and facial expressions.

Multimodal composition provides an opportunity for you to develop and
practice skills that will translate to future coursework and career
opportunities. Creating a multimodal text requires you to demonstrate
aptitude in various modes and reflects the requirements for
communication skills beyond the academic world. In other words, although
multimodal creations may seem to be little more than pictures and
captions at times, they must be carefully constructed to be effective.
Even the simplest compositions are meticulously planned and executed.
Multimodal compositions may include written text, such as blog post
text, slideshow text, and website content; image-based content, such as
infographics and photo essays; or audiovisual content, including
podcasts, public service announcements, and videos.

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

Multimodal composition is especially important in a 21st-century world
where communication must represent and transfer across cultural
contexts. Because using multiple modes helps a writer make meaning in
different channels (media that communicate a message), the availability
of different modes is especially important to help you make yourself
understood as an author. In academic settings, multimodal content
creation increases engagement, improves equity, and helps prepare you to
be a global citizen. The same is true for your readers. Multimodal
composition is important in addressing and supporting cultural and
linguistic diversity. Modes are shaped by social, cultural, and historic
factors, all of which influence their use and impact in communication.
And it isn't just readers who benefit from multimodal composition.
Combining a variety of modes allows you as a composer to connect to your
own lived experiences---the representation of experiences and choices
that you have faced in your own life---and helps you develop a unique
voice, thus leveraging your knowledge and experiences.
