m00003

2c3e68b1-188b-48c0-86b9-29e528a400e7

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify various rhetorical and culture contexts while reading for
inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and communication.

Demonstrate that genre conventions vary and are shaped by purpose,
culture, and expectation.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

"I can never deny the deeply personal place that the work comes from."
::::

# Digital Representations of Embodiment and Cultural Identity {#sect-00002}

Torika Bolatagici is a creator, educator, and art historian who works
with various modalities, including [photography](#), video, fine art,
and [mixed media](#). Bolatagici was born in Tasmania and, as a young
person, spent time living in Hobart, Tasmania; Sydney, Australia; and
her father's village of Suvavou, Fiji. Her work has been featured across
the globe, including in exhibits in the United States, Taiwan, and
Mexico as well as throughout New Zealand and Australia. She has a PhD
from the School of Art and Design, University of New South Wales, where
she wrote her dissertation on "Somatic Sotia: Commodity, Agency and the
Fijian Military Body."

In 2013 and 2014, Bolatagici coordinated the [Contemporary Pacific Arts
Festival](#), curating an experience that focused on Pacific arts
practices in Australia. She invited speakers to present on themes
spanning activism and the arts, cultural appropriation, and contemporary
artistic practices. Bolatagici now works as an educator, lecturing on
art and performance at Deakin University in Australia, and has led youth
arts workshops in the local Pacific community.

Reflecting on the beginnings of her career, she describes going through
her undergraduate coursework and feeling the responsibility of bringing
"brown-ness" to the classroom. After finding that higher education
largely dismissed the lived experiences of marginalized communities and
spending time at the Stuart Hall Library at the Institute of
International Visual Arts, Bolatagici was inspired to create the pop-up
Community Reading Room in Melbourne, Australia, in 2013.

Through the pop-up room, she hoped to engage the community in
international visual arts and culture. She began her initiative by
sharing her own personal collection, including texts and anthologies of
BIPOC (Black, Indigenous, and people of color) art. The Community
Reading Room provides an emphasis on contemporary art and theory from
Africa, the Americas, and Oceania.

Bolatagici has incorporated a [variety of media](#) into her academic
and professional portfolios, describing how her work helps her not only
[represent diverse cultures](#) but also explore her own identity. From
[photo essays](#) to academic papers, her compositions are anchored by
the common thread of representing marginalized people and experiences,
particularly those related to communities of color. Her creative output
has focused on representation of mixed-race identity, Pacific arts
practices, and militarism. Through mixed media, she investigates
relationships between visual culture and historiography (study of
historical writings); human ecology (study of relationships between
humans and their natural, social, and created environments); and the
intersection of gender, knowledge, and globalization.

Bolatagici describes her work as interdisciplinary, creating components
across a wide range of media. Instead of limiting herself, she allows
her work to flow naturally, staying focused in the moment. With these
unique components, she looks at the relationship between visual culture
and human ecology. This interdisciplinary approached emerged for
Bolatagici even before she knew it as multimodalism. Because her
interests in college varied so greatly, she pursued a media arts degree
so that she could explore visual arts as they related to cultural
studies. This pursuit grew into a career that now includes new modes and
media sources, such as photography, video, and mixed media.

Choosing a multimodal approach because it better communicates the
complex subjects she conveys, Bolatagici draws on her own experiences in
order to represent the experiences of marginalized people at the
forefront of her compositions. For Bolatagici, creating in any form is
bigger than the page, and she aims to bring her reality to life through
visual, textual, and multimedia creations that communicate in four
dimensions.

Read Bolatagici's [weekly journal](#) during her residency in Barbados.

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00003}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
