m00004

94b23b86-3757-4313-8bf1-b7026aa441fb

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify key genre conventions, including structure, tone, and
mechanics.

Implement common formats and design features for different text types.

Demonstrate how genre conventions vary and are shaped by purpose,
culture, and expectation.

The multimodal genres of writing are based on the idea that modes work
in different ways, with different outcomes, to create various vehicles
for communication. By layering, or combining, modes, an author can make
meaning and communicate through mixed modes what a single mode cannot on
its own. Essentially, modes "cooperate" to communicate the author's
intent as they interweave meanings captured by each.

For example, think of a public service announcement about environmental
conservation. A composer can create a linguistic text about the dangers
of plastic pollution in oceans and support the ideas with knowledge of
or expertise in the subject. Yet words alone may not communicate the
message forcefully, particularly if the audience consists of people who
have never considered the impact of pollution on the oceans. That
composer, then, might combine the text with images of massive amounts of
human-generated plastic waste littering a shoreline, thus strengthening
the argument and enhancing meaning by touching on audience emotions. By
using images to convey some of the message, the composer layers modes.
The picture alone does not tell the whole story, but when combined with
informational text, it enhances the viewer's understanding of the issue.
Modes, therefore, can be combined in various ways to communicate a
rhetorical idea effectively.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Audience Awareness {#sect-00002}

As with any type of composition, knowing your audience (the readers and
viewers for whom you are creating) will help you determine what
information to include and what genre, mode(s), or media in which to
present it. Consider your audience when choosing a composition's tone
(composer's attitude toward the audience or subject), substance, and
language. Considering the audience is critical not only in traditional
academic writing but also in nearly any genre or mode you choose. Ask
yourself these questions when analyzing your audience's awareness:

What (and how much) does the audience already know about the topic? The
amount of background information needed can influence what genre, modes,
and media types you include and how you use them. You don't want to bore
an audience with information that is common knowledge or overwhelm an
audience with information they know nothing about.

What is the audience's viewpoint on the subject? Are you creating for a
skeptical audience or one that largely agrees with your rhetorical
arguments?

How do you relate to your audience? Do you share cultural understanding,
or are you presenting information or beliefs that will be unfamiliar?
This information will help you shape the message, tone, and structure of
the composition.

Understanding your audience allows you to choose rhetorical devices that
reflect ethos (appeals to ethics: credibility), logos (appeals to logic:
reason), and pathos (appeals to sympathy: emotion) to create
contextually responsive compositions through multiple modes.

It important to address audience diversity in all types of composition,
but the unique aspects of multimodal composition present particular
opportunities and challenges. First, when you compose, you do so through
your own cultural filter, formed from your experiences, gender,
education, and other factors. Multimodal composition opens up the
ability to develop your cultural filter through various methods. Think
about images of your lived experiences, videos capturing cultural
events, or even gestures in live performances. Also consider the
diversity of your audience members and how that affects the content
choices you make during composition. Avoiding ethnocentrism---the
assumption that the customs, values, and beliefs of your culture are
superior to others---is an important consideration when addressing your
audience, as is using bias-free language, especially regarding
ethnicity, gender, and abilities.

# Blogs, Vlogs, and Creative Compositions {#sect-00003}

Among the modes available to you as a composer, blogs (regularly updated
websites, usually run by an individual or a small group) have emerged as
a significant genre in digital literature. The term *blog*, a
combination of *web* and *log*, was coined in 1999 and gained rapid
popularity in the early 2000s. In general, blogs have a relatively
narrow focus on a topic or argument and present a distinctive structure
that includes these features:

A headline or title draws in potential readers. Headlines are meant to
grab attention, be short, and accurately reflect the content of the blog
post.

An introduction hooks the reader, briefly introducing the topic and
establishing the author's credibility on the subject.

Short paragraphs often are broken up by images, videos, or other media
to make meaning and supplement or support the text content.

The narrative is often composed in a style in which the author claims or
demonstrates expertise.

Media such as images, video, and infographics depict information
graphically and break up text.

Hyperlinks (links to other internet locations) to related content often
serve as evidence supporting the author's claim.

A call to action provides clear and actionable instructions that engage
the reader.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Blogs offer accessibility and an opportunity to make meaning in new
ways. By integrating images and audiovisual media, you can develop a
multimodal representation of arguments and ideas. Blogs also provide an
outlet for conveying ideas through both personal and formal narratives
and are used frequently in industries from entertainment to scientific
research to government organizations.

Newer in the family of multimodal composition is the video blog, or
vlog, a blog for which the medium is video. Vlogs usually combine video
embedded in a website with supporting text, images, or other modes of
communication. Vlogging often takes on a narrative structure, similar to
other types of storytelling, with the added element of supplementary
audio and video, including digital transitions that connect one idea or
scene to another. Vlogs offer ample opportunities to mix modalities.

Vlogs give a literal *voice* to a composer, who typically narrates or
speaks directly to the camera. Like a blogger, a vlog creator acts as an
expert, telling a narrative story or using rhetoric to argue a point.
Vlogs often strive to create an authentic and informal tone, similar to
published blogs, inviting a stream-of-consciousness or interview-like
style. Therefore, they often work well when targeted toward audiences
for whom a casual mood is valuable and easily understood.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

Other creative compositions include websites, digital or print
newsletters, podcasts, and a wide variety of other content. Each
composition type has its own best practices regarding structure and
organization, often depending on the chosen modalities, the way they are
used, and the intended audience. Whatever the mode, however, all
multimodal writing has several characteristics in common, beginning with
effective, intentional composition.

# Effective Writing {#sect-00004}

Experimenting with modes and media is not an excuse for poorly developed
writing that lacks focus, organization, thought, purpose, or attention
to mechanics. Although multimodal compositions offer flexibility of
expression, the content still must be presented in well-crafted,
organized, and purposeful ways that reflect the author's purpose and the
audience's needs.

To be well-crafted, a composition should reflect the author's use of
literary devices to convey meaning, use of relevant connections, and
acknowledgment of grammar and writing conventions.

To be organized, a composition should reflect the author's use of
effective transitions and a logical structure appropriate to the chosen
mode.

To be purposeful, a composition should show that the author addresses
the needs of the audience, uses rhetorical devices that advance the
argument, and offers insightful understanding of the topic.

Organization of multimodal compositions refers to the sequence of
message elements. You must decide which ideas require attention, how
much and in what order, and which modalities create maximum impact on
readers. While many types of formal and academic writing follow a
prescribed format, or at least the general outline of one, the exciting
and sometimes overwhelming features of multimodal possibilities open the
door to any number of acceptable formats. Some of these are prescribed,
and others more open ended; your job will inevitably be to determine
when to follow a template and when to create something new. As the
composer, you seek to structure media in ways that will enable the
reader, or audience, to derive meaning. Even small changes in media,
rhetorical appeal, and organization can alter the ways in which the
audience participates in the construction of meaning.

Within a medium---for example, a video---you might include images,
audio, and text. By shifting the organization, placement, and
interaction among the modes, you change the structure of the video and
therefore create varieties of meaning. Now, imagine you use that same
structure of images, audio, and text, but change the medium to a
slideshow. The impact on the audience will likely change with the change
in medium. Consider the infamous opening scene of the horror movie *The
Shining* (1980). The primary medium, video, shows a car driving through
a mountainous region. After audio is added, however, the meaning of the
multimodal composition changes, creating an emphasis on
pace---management of dead air---and tone---attitude toward the
subject---that communicates something new to the audience.

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

# Exploring the Genre {#sect-00005}

These are the key terms and characteristics of multimodal texts.

Alignment:

the way in which elements such as text features, images, and
particularly text are placed on a page. Text can be aligned at the left,
center, or right. Alignment contributes to organization and how media
transitions within a text.

Audience:

readers or viewers of the composition.

Channel:

a medium used to communicate a message. Often-used channels include
websites, blogs, social media, print, audio, and video-hosting sites.

Complementary:

describes content that is different across two or more modes, both of
which are necessary for understanding. Often audio and visual modes are
complementary, with one making the other more meaningful.

Emphasis:

the elements in media that are most significant or pronounced. The
emphasis choices have a major impact on the overall meaning of the text.

Focus:

a clear purpose for composition, also called the central idea, main
point, or guiding principle. Focus should include the specific audience
the composer is trying to influence.

Layering:

combining modes in a single composition.

Layout:

the organization of elements on a page, including text, images, shapes,
and overall composition. Layout applies primarily to the visual mode.

Media:

the means and channels of reaching an audience (for example, image,
website, song). A medium (singular form of

media

) can contain multiple modes.

Mode:

the method of communication (linguistic, visual, audio, or spatial means
of creating meaning). Media can incorporate more than one mode.

Organization:

the pattern of arrangement that allows a reader to understand text or
images in a composition. Organization may be textual, visual, or
spatial.

Proximity:

the relationship between objects in space, specifically how close to or
far from one another they are. Proximity can show a relationship between
elements and is often important in layout.

Purpose:

an author's reason for writing a text, including the reasoning that
accounts for which modes of presentation to use. Composers of multimodal
texts may seek to persuade, inform, or entertain the audience.

Repetition:

a unifying feature, such as a pattern used more than once, in the way in
which elements (text features, typeface, color, etc.) are used on a
page. Repetition often indicates emphasis or a particular theme.
Repetitions and patterns can help focus a composition, explore a theme,
and emphasize important points.

Supplementary:

describes content that is different in two or more modes, where a
composer uses one mode to convey primary understanding and the other(s)
to support or extend understanding. Supplementary content should not be
thought of as "extra," for its purpose is to expand on the primary
media.

Text:

written words. In multimodal composition, text can refer to a piece of
communication as a whole, incorporating written words, images, sounds,
and movement.

Tone:

the composer's attitude toward the subject and/or the audience.

Transitions:

words, phrases, or audiovisual elements that help readers make
connections between ideas in a multimodal text, including connections
from sentence to sentence, paragraph to paragraph, and mode to mode.
Transitions show relationships between ideas and help effectively
organize a composition.
