m00005

bff4f751-1e36-45fe-b2de-ffa6a15936b5

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Read a diverse range of texts in different genres to identify how
conventions are shaped by purpose, language, culture, and audience
expectation.

Read effectively for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and
communication in various rhetorical and cultural contexts.

Demonstrate the relationships between ideas, patterns of organization,
and verbal and nonverbal elements.

# Introduction {#sect-00002}

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

As a multimodal composer, you may choose to employ ethos, a rhetorical
method of persuasion. In this context, ethos is an appeal to readers in
order to establish the author's credibility and character. In a
rhetorical appeal, you can use ethos through fair, neutral language to
show trustworthiness. In multimodal composition, ethos aims to convince
readers that you are a reliable and an ethical expert on the subject.
When using ethos, authors present sources that support their argument in
balanced and honest ways, revealing their writing to be reliable.
Authors also seek to understand their audience, establishing
commonalities between those who support the issue, those who are
undecided or indifferent, and those who dissent. Often, authors invoke
the words or ideas of respected figures, authorities, or even religious
texts when using ethos to convince readers. Analyzing multimodal
compositions can help you learn how to use rhetorical frames in the
multimodal composing process. In the blog post you are about to read,
the author uses ethos, along with structural aspects of multimodal
texts, to establish herself as a trustworthy expert on the subject of
pollution prevention. Studying the components of multimodal writing in
this blog will help you understand how multimedia platforms utilize
elements of text, media, and modes.

# "Celebrating a Win-Win: 30 Years of Progress under the Pollution Prevention Act" by Alexandra Dapolito Dunn (b. 1967) {#sect-00003}

On this day in 1990, a new era was ushered in for Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) and the nation when the Pollution Prevention
(P2) Act was signed into law. The act gave the agency new tools to join
with states, tribes, and communities to prevent pollution *before* it
happens. It also marked a shift in the paradigm of environmental
protection, which had been mostly focused on end-of-pipe pollution
control and clean-up strategies.

**Headline and Tone.* The linguistic headline immediately allows readers
to know the author's position on the subject, and its visual component
of boldfaced text allows readers to understand that it's important. Not
only does it clearly preface the article by informing the reader of its
topic (the Pollution Prevention Act), but it also presents the author's
positive attitude toward the subject through the words* celebrating
*and* win-win*.*

**Context.* Dunn contextualizes the Pollution Prevention Act, showing it
as a positive national achievement that partnered the government with
the people to prevent pollution.*

Equally important, the P2 Act strengthened EPA's role as an ally of
American businesses, helping them save billions of dollars and improve
operations. As EPA Administrator Andrew Wheeler has said, "It's far
better to prevent pollution from occurring than to go in after the fact
and clean it up."

**Quotation from an Authority.* This quotation from the EPA
administrator supports Dunn's assertion that the P2 Act is good for
America. The quotation helps lend credibility to the author's claim that
the P2 Act has been a success over the past 30 years.*

**Purpose.* Dunn's purpose is to show how the P2 Act has been successful
over time. Thus far, she has supported the claims that it has improved
the environment and helped local governments and private businesses.*

The P2 Act greatly expanded the opportunities for "source reduction" to
reduce or prevent pollution at the source through cost-effective changes
in production, operation, and raw materials use. These changes can
reduce the amount of pollution entering a waste stream or the
environment prior to recycling, treatment or disposal, and can offer
industry substantial savings in reduced raw material, pollution control,
pollution clean-up and liability costs.

**Short Paragraphs.* Dunn uses short, easily digestible paragraphs in
her blog post. Short paragraphs are visually effective on a screen and
ensure that the reader is not overwhelmed by text while helping the
writer organize ideas.*

**Ethos.* Dunn uses neutral, measured language to convince the reader
that she is a reliable and ethical expert.*

One of EPA's first pollution prevention successes was with its 33/50
Program, a voluntary program under which companies committed to reduce
their releases of 17 top priority chemicals 33 percent by 1992 and by 50
percent by 1995. Subsequent EPA programs built on the 33/50 and P2 model
and are still working to reduce pollution across the country today
including EPA's [WaterSense](#), [Safer Choice](#), [Environmentally
Preferable Purchasing](#), [Green Chemistry](#), and our [SmartWay
Transport Partnership Program](#). President Trump acknowledged the
effectiveness of these and other EPA programs in a 2018 Executive Order
that directed federal agencies to use EPA's P2 resources to meet their
statutory sustainable purchasing requirements.

**Hyperlinks.* Hyperlinks are a functional tool and employ the visual
mode to command the reader's attention. Dunn uses hyperlinks to the EPA
programs she names, establishing the agency as a source of pollution
prevention efforts and, as a result, an expert on the issues covered in
the blog post. In addition, she links to the presidential executive
order, which establishes credibility.*

The P2 Act also serves as an authority for collecting information from
reporting facilities through the [Toxics Release Inventory](#) (TRI)
about their management of certain toxic chemicals, including source
reduction approaches. Since this reporting began in 1991, we have
learned that over 24,000 unique facilities have taken more than 450,000
actions to prevent pollution and reduce the amount of toxic chemicals
entering the environment, such as spill and leak prevention measures,
using safer chemicals, modifying industrial processes, and updating
operating procedures.

**Transition between Paragraphs.* By using the word* also, *Dunn signals
that she is shifting to another success the EPA has achieved in
preventing pollution.*

**Statistics as Supporting Evidence.* To support the impact of the P2
Act, Dunn uses statistics as evidence to show that the act has
facilitated the prevention of pollution and toxic chemicals.*

Perhaps the most impactful and collaborative program to grow out of the
P2 Act is EPA's P2 Grants Program. Since 1990, EPA has awarded more than
1,200 grants to state, tribal, non-profit, and university partners to
work directly with U.S. businesses to develop and implement source
reduction techniques. With the assistance from P2 grants, businesses
have been able to save over \$1.5 billion since 2011 while also reducing
the use of hazardous materials by over 570 million pounds.

**Supporting Evidence.* Dunn provides evidence of the success of the P2
Act by showing how one program has helped local governments and private
businesses save money.*

As we celebrate the 30th anniversary of the Pollution Prevention Act
today, I would like to thank all our state and local pollution
prevention partners, as well as all the businesses that have joined with
us to score a true win-win for the American people.

**Audience.* Although this blog is written on a public government
website, Dunn shifts focus at the end to directly address businesses and
local governments that have partnered with her or her organization.*

You can access this post on the [EPA blog](#).

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00015}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
