m00006

78a58d46-6a29-4972-b848-385be0c8057f

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Craft textual and digital compositions using various genres of modes and
technologies.

Match different modes of communication to various rhetorical situations.

Identify various genres of multimodal and online writing.

Now you will experiment with using multiple modes to create an advocacy
project. An advocacy project tells the story of an overarching
problem---for example, world hunger---and uses multiple modalities to
inform readers about that issue and to propose change. You may be
familiar with similar advocacy projects; perhaps you have been involved
with them in your everyday life. Think carefully about advocacy
initiatives you know of or have encountered, and find out whether you
can pinpoint the answers to these three questions: *What problem is
being addressed? Who is the intended audience? What mode or modes are
being used, including what media?* Then think about what works. *How do
the chosen media speak to the specific audience? Why might the
initiative's creators have made those choices?*

After you have chosen a cause and begun working through the composition,
you might want to tweak the modes you are working with, including how
they relate to one another. You may find, for example, that your primary
communication to readers would be better achieved with a different mode
or that you need stronger transitions to move your reader through your
rhetorical appeal. Don't be afraid to experiment, revise, and examine
your project from different angles. Just like a literary text, a
multimodal composition is a living document, one that can be improved
over time with peer review and revision. As you work, focus your project
by concentrating on addressing your audience, purpose, and organization.

# Summary of Assignment {#sect-00002}

Create a multimodal advocacy project for a cause or an issue that you
choose or that your instructor chooses for you. If you are free to
choose your own topic, here is a short list from which you may draw
inspiration:

Providing clean and safe water

Ending gun violence

Addressing nutritional needs of children locally or around the world

Anti-bullying

Reducing your carbon footprint

Access to health care

Anti-racism

Vaccination policies

Social media and free speech

Climate change

Immigration

You may also use these brainstorming questions to narrow down your
topic:

What are you passionate about?

Where do you notice a need in your community / the world?

What ideas do you have for addressing the issue?

What existing campaigns do you find compelling, and why?

What existing projects can you build on, and how?

What goals do you hope to achieve?

Choose a need or an issue that is important to you, because you will
develop a rhetorical appeal to inform and convince your audience.
Although world hunger is an important issue and may not be a bad
example, consider choosing problems that you encounter locally, even in
your everyday life. The closer you are to the issue, the more easily you
will be able to develop rhetorical appeals. As you compose your project,
consider the best modes and methods to communicate your ideas. Consider
how to add and combine different modalities to increase audience impact
without overdoing it.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Another Lens 1. To broaden your perspective on advocacy, find ways to
connect directly to those whom the issue most closely affects. Ensure
that your proposed advocacy provides pragmatic and helpful solutions to
the problem for the targeted audience. For example, if you choose to
create a project based on the need for education opportunities for young
mothers who have survived domestic abuse, advocating for full-time
schooling options with no consideration for childcare would be neither
pragmatic nor helpful. In other words, don't assume you know best. Open
yourself to information gleaned from research, interviews, or informal
conversation. If possible, try to speak with someone whom your project
will affect.

Determine what others are already doing to address the need you have
identified, and decide whether to build on that work or take a different
route. Identify the most effective means of translating the vision you
decide on for your audience, which may differ from the audience targeted
by other advocacy groups.

Another Lens 2. Another option for approaching this project is to
identify and analyze multimodal advocacy initiatives already occurring
on a large scale today. Some well-known ones include [Charity:
Water](#), [Free Rice](#), [It Gets Better](#), and [Upworthy](#). After
choosing an advocacy campaign to research, consider the following:

What is the purpose of the advocacy initiative? What do the organizers
want to achieve?

Whom does the initiative address? (Knowing the target audience will help
you analyze how effectively the organizers use a multimodal approach to
reach them.)

How does the initiative persuade its audience? Are rhetorical appeals
used, and if so, how? Why do you think these choices are made?

What modes of communication are being used? (These may include social
media platforms and streams.) Does the campaign rely more on textual or
non-textual media to convey its message? How are modes combined, and how
effective are these choices?

After thinking about these questions, create an addition to this
advocacy initiative. Introduce your composition by explaining what you
have included and why.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

# Defining a Primary Purpose and Goal {#sect-00005}

After you have decided on your topic, the first step is to identify the
primary purpose, or reason, for your advocacy project. Your goal is what
you want to accomplish with it. Do you intend to inform people about an
issue they are likely to know little about, or do you want to inspire
people around you to take action in creating a sustainable solution that
addresses the issue at hand? **Goals are broad statements and can be
general and abstract, as in the case of this goal: *Improve access to
clean water for students in Flint, Michigan.*

Part of identifying your goal is to articulate your claim, or assertion,
about the issue you have chosen. Your claim is equivalent to a thesis in
a traditional written essay. Identifying your purpose and goal will help
you decide how to structure your project and, ultimately, which media
and modes to employ.

Consider also your audience. You already have learned and discussed the
importance of understanding your audience's perspective, including
social, cultural, or linguistic factors that could affect your
communication. Understanding what your audience knows, their lived
experiences, and what is important to them will help you shape your
narrative. Complete these sentence starters to organize your ideas and
begin the planning stages of your project.

*Define the situation.*

My project focuses on \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, which is a problem because
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

*Define your purpose.*

The purpose of my project is to \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, which will be
accomplished by \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

*Write a thesis, hypothesis, or line of inquiry.*

The issue I'm addressing is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

My position on the issue is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

Write your thesis as a declarative sentence. See [Writing Process:
Creating a Position Argument](#) for help writing a thesis.
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

*Define your goals and objectives.*

I will try to \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ by \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

*Define your audience.*

The intended audience for my project is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. They are
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (familiar/unfamiliar) with the issue. I will reach them
by \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

After you define the situation, it is time to choose the mode or modes
to communicate your ideas to your audience. For example, will you write
an op-ed, or opinion piece, in which you formally discuss the issue and
advocate for change? Will you write and deliver a speech that relies on
rhetorical devices to convey your passion for the issue? **You might
also consider **advertisements and public service announcements (PSAs),
including audio and video versions, as other effective ways to "sell" a
concept, often combining modes for added impact. For examples, peruse
[The Op-Ed Project](#) or the [Ad Council](#).

Just as your choice of topic must be rhetorically sound and specific,
your choice of mode should be based on the circumstances under which
your audience will best meet and respond to your advocacy project. This
decision may feel daunting, because composing within the multimodal
genres means that you have many options. You might choose a video
advertisement, a visual flyer, a performance, a photo essay, or
something completely different. Consider the modes you might use to
accomplish your goals, responding to the needs of your audience.

+--------------+--------------+-------------------+---------------+-------------------+--------------+
|              | Linguistic   | Visual Mode       | Audio Mode    | Spatial Mode      | Gestural     |
|              | Mode         |                   |               |                   | Mode         |
+==============+==============+===================+===============+===================+==============+
| *Uses in     | written text | color             | sound         | arrangement       | body         |
| Composition* |              |                   |               |                   | language     |
|              | word choice  | style             | narration     | proximity         |              |
|              |              |                   |               |                   | facial       |
|              | organization | size              | music/effects | organization      | expressions  |
|              |              |                   |               |                   |              |
|              | tone         | perspective       | silence       |                   |              |
+--------------+--------------+-------------------+---------------+-------------------+--------------+
| *Primary     | print or     | infographic       | speech        | infographic       | speech       |
| Types of     | digital      |                   |               |                   |              |
| Media (media | media        | photo essay       | advertisement | photo essay       | presentation |
| may cross    | (newspaper,  |                   |               |                   |              |
| multiple     | blog,        | advertisement     | radio         | website/blog/vlog | vlog         |
| modes)*      | professional |                   |               |                   |              |
|              | publication) | PSA               | podcast       |                   |              |
|              |              |                   |               |                   |              |
|              |              | website/blog/vlog | vlog          |                   |              |
+--------------+--------------+-------------------+---------------+-------------------+--------------+

# Varying Purposes for Integration of Media or Other Genres {#sect-00006}

Once you have determined your purpose and audience and have considered
the impact of including multiple modes and media, it is time to begin
drafting your project.

## Gathering Information {#sect-00007}

The first step in any project is to collect and analyze sources. You
will likely need to explore relevant research, data, and literature that
already address your topic. The following questions are a good place to
start: *What do you already know about the issue you have chosen to
address? What do you need to learn, and where can you find that
information?*

When considering the data and research you read and collect, it is
important to address multiple perspectives, particularly regarding
culture, language, and social issues. It is essential to have a clear
understanding of the needs of the community you seek to advocate for, as
defined by that community.

Now plan for the ways in which your project will create and support the
argument, the modes and media you will use, and how these will reach
your audience. Start by completing a graphic organizer like [\#](#).
Begin with what you already know, including the sources of that
information, formal research you have done, and informal or anecdotal
data you have. After looking carefully at what you have, ask yourself
what you still need to learn about the topic to understand and
communicate the issue to your audience. Finally, brainstorm for
strategies to learn that information. These may include research,
interviews, or other methods of data collection. Then carry out that
information collection until you have what you need.

  What I already know   Source(s) of that information   Information and data that I need to collect   Where I can find information
  --------------------- ------------------------------- --------------------------------------------- ------------------------------
                                                                                                       

  : Planning Chart {#table-00002}

## Determine Modes and Media {#sect-00008}

Once your research is complete (or, at least, once you have a good
enough foundation to get started), determine which modes and media you
will employ to address your audience. Research, like composition as a
whole, is largely an open-ended process, one in which you may need to
experiment to determine whether the modes, media, and genres you choose
accurately and effectively communicate your purpose to the audience. A
good way to make this decision is to create a mockup or storyboard. A
mockup is a visual representation of compositions that are basically
static. You can use a mockup for media such as websites, posters, or
photo essays. A storyboard **is a sequence of drawings that represents
the progression of a piece that moves through time. You can use a
storyboard for media such as videos or podcasts.

Use graphic organizers like [\#](#) and [\#](#) for your mockup or
storyboard. Remember to consider *all* modes, including linguistic,
visual, audio, spatial, and gestural, and what impact they will make on
your audience.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

When you finish, look over your mockup or storyboard. Then consider
whether your choices effectively address the needs of your audience. For
example, a student composing a project calling for humanitarian efforts
to improve the living conditions of citizens in war-torn Syria might
choose the genre of a photo essay, with visual media and captions used
as a powerful way to tell the story. This choice will be more effective
than relying mainly on text or other means alone.

<figure id="fig-00005">

</figure>

That student might ask and answer questions such as the following:

What do I want to convey? The desperate situation in Syria because of
the war

Who is my audience? Online readers interested in current events

How do the media I've chosen speak to the audience? They tell a story
more powerfully than text can by itself.

As you brainstorm, don't feel obligated to include every piece of
information or media you collect. You'll want to choose carefully,
ensuring that the information and media you use serve your audience and
rhetorical goals.

## Introduce Other Genres {#sect-00009}

After establishing the primary genre, it's time to define the purpose
for introducing other genres, including how you will introduce them
smoothly with seamless transitions. In the example above, the student
chooses a photo essay as the primary genre. A photo essay usually
includes multiple pictures, laid out on a blog or website with or
without text. If there is an opportunity to directly address the
audience, the student might consider writing a script to incorporate the
genre of presentation. Or they might choose to create a slideshow or
video, incorporating a voice-over or textual quotations. All of these
choices depend on their purpose as the composer, the rhetorical methods
they believe will work best, and a knowledge of their audience,
including how best to respond to social and cultural needs. It's
important not to incorporate more modes simply for the sake of having
more. Each choice you make will either enhance or detract from your
purpose.

## Compose {#sect-00010}

Countless tools are available for creating multimodal texts. At first,
this project may seem daunting as you ponder which tool to choose and
possibly learn to use new technology. However, you will likely find you
can use tools that are not only familiar but also readily available.
Software and apps that you already have on your phone, tablet, or
laptop, such as PowerPoint, Google Slides, and Keynote, not only are
useful for slideshows but also allow you to create graphics and videos
that you can upload to YouTube with a single click. You can record
podcasts by using the memo feature on your phone or a free online
recording tool and then upload them to SoundCloud.

<figure id="fig-00006">

</figure>

After you have created your mockup or storyboard, it is time to create
the first draft of your project. Sometimes called a *first cut*,
particularly in audiovisual presentations, this is the next step in
drafting the composition's basic elements. It is also your chance to
experiment with the modes and media you have considered to determine
what works and what doesn't. This first cut creates a prototype, a
preliminary model or draft, that you will revise according to feedback
from peer review. Consider this prototype as a starting point. Keep in
mind that the composition process, like the writing process, is
recursive, not linear. You can move from drafting to research to
revising and organizing at any point.

<figure id="fig-00007">

</figure>

Though your options for your project may seem endless, this is how the
student drafted the photo essay about the war in Syria. Because the
composition primarily uses the visual mode, the student created a
mockup, which includes the photo from [\#](#) as well as other photos
and shared information.

<figure id="fig-00008">

</figure>

As shown here, this mockup is basic; it contains only the photographs
the author has chosen and a short textual excerpt that provides context
and more information to support the image. Although there were other
options for this photo essay, the student considered them and decided to
use only images with some supporting text, basing this choice on
purpose, audience, and organizational principles. As you consider your
options, begin by focusing on one mode, then build a mockup according to
your audience and purpose. The mockup may be as simple as an outline of
a speech or a PowerPoint template to which you add text and images. The
idea is to create a concrete piece to use for your prototype.

Creating the prototype is the next step. Remember that this is the stage
at which you consider which elements of mode and media to use and put
them "on the page." Keeping in mind the purpose, organization, and
audience, design a prototype that meets those guiding principles.

<figure id="fig-00009">

</figure>

For the prototype, the student made several choices related to the
visual mode, incorporating both textual and graphic images. Remember
that the composer stated an intent to convey the desperate situation in
Syria resulting from war and is speaking to an audience of online
readers interested in current events.

The first element added is a headline, "The Syrian War." It allows the
reader to know immediately what the topic is and get a general idea of
the context of the photo essay. The student has taken the text from the
mockup and for each picture created a caption---a short statement that
provides context for each event depicted and helps readers progress
through the narrative of the photo essay. In addition, the composer has
chosen to stage the captions against a black backdrop with white space
between each photograph and caption, a visually appealing layout that is
effective in its use of transitions. The images set against the black
background stand out. Viewers can easily understand that they are
supposed to read each row from left to right and understand the
relationship between each picture and the one following it.

With these adjustments, the student has completed the prototype. It is
now ready for peer review.

# Asking Specific Questions of the Writer {#sect-00011}

Peer review is an important step in helping you determine the ways in
which your multimodal composition works well and how it can be improved.
Peer review allows you to gain an outside perspective on your writing
and composing processes and thus makes it easier to clear up any
questions related to organization, purpose, audience, and genre.

For your review, provide your peer reviewer with your mockup or
storyboard and your prototype. Seeing your process may help your
reviewer offer feedback and suggestions. Your peer reviewer can use the
following questions to think critically about your project, focusing on
both its strengths and its areas for improvement, and to guide their
feedback. Your response to these questions will guide your revision
process.

## Questions about Topic {#sect-00012}

How did you choose the focus of the composition?

How did you narrow down the scope of your topic? Should it be broadened
or narrowed further?

## Questions about Purpose {#sect-00013}

My reaction after reading or viewing the composition is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
because \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Does this reaction match your intent for the
composition?

In my opinion, the thesis of this composition is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. If
this is your thesis, how can you strengthen your rhetorical arguments to
better support it? If you intended to have a different thesis, how can
you restate your claims to clarify the composition's purpose?

The project uses sufficient evidence to support your claim that
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. How can you better support the claim that
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_?

## Questions about Audience and Culture {#sect-00014}

What audience are you trying to reach? What are the characteristics of
this audience?

What do you want your audience's reaction to this composition to be?

How have you accounted for the similarities and differences between you
and your audience?

Are the elements of the composition accessible and meaningful to the
audience?

## Questions about Genre and Media {#sect-00015}

The genre of this text is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, including conventions common
to this genre such as \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Optional: You might consider
including other conventions such as \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ in order to
strengthen the content by \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. How does this genre best
capture the message you want to convey?

The media chosen within the project's genre (do/do not) effectively
communicate the author's intent by \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. How could using
other media such as \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ increase the impact of the
communication?

A transition that works well in this composition is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.
How can you create a more effective transition here: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_?

# Responding to Questions {#sect-00016}

You will next revise your project, using your discretion to incorporate
your peer reviewer's feedback. After considering reviewer comments,
actively engage with that feedback to plan your revisions. As with
textual compositions, revisions to multimodal compositions often involve
rewording, shifting ideas, and rewriting to better address your audience
and purpose.

<figure id="fig-00010">

</figure>

## Answering Questions {#sect-00017}

To begin the revision process, answer the questions your peer reviewer
has posed. Focus first on the rhetorical situation, including your
composition's topic, purpose, and audience as well as questions
surrounding culture. Reflect on improvements you might make to represent
and communicate the rhetorical situation within the scope of a
multimodal composition. Consider using these sentence frames to answer
your reviewer's questions.

The reason I chose this genre is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (relate to
purpose/audience/organization). I could better communicate by
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

I used rhetorical appeal through \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. This is effective in
this way: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ but can be strengthened further by
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

I considered the culture of (myself/viewers or readers/subject of
composition) by \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. Other cultural components I would like
to consider or address are \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. My plan to do that is
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

Next, answer questions about genre and media. *How might the tools
available serve you more effectively? Is your choice of media the most
effective to communicate with your audience? What aspects of the primary
genre are key to helping you convey your issue? How can you introduce
other genres, or aspects of other genres, to strengthen the impact?* In
responding, be mindful of creating smooth transitions and content that
is uncluttered and clear in meaning. Consider using these sentence
frames to answer your reviewer's questions.

The genre \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ captures the message I am trying to convey by
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. I could strengthen this communication by
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

Using new media such as \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ or \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ could
increase the impact of the communication by \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

My plan for \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (media/mode) and \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
(media/mode) to work together is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. I will revise my
composition to achieve that by \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

I will strengthen my transitions by \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The student composer of the prototype above might answer a reviewer's
questions in the following way:

I chose the photo essay genre to show the effects of war in Syria in an
expressive, meaningful way. I designed a simple layout contrasting the
colors black and white to organize the narrative. I primarily called on
pathos to invoke the emotions and values of viewers, drawing them in
with powerful images, but I think I could strengthen the emotional
appeal by rearranging the pictures and more clearly addressing the most
powerful statement: that 80 percent of the city was left uninhabitable.
I also think my headline could be more attention grabbing, and I plan to
revise it to draw viewers in and more accurately reflect the subject
matter. I will revise my composition to achieve a more effective
presentation by editing my text to make it more direct and by reordering
my photos to leave viewers with a more forceful statement.

## Revising {#sect-00018}

In creating multimodal compositions, revising can refer to taking
multiple pieces of content and arranging, rearranging, deleting, and
adding to the greater whole. Consider the project on the war in Syria.
If choosing to create a video of the photo essay with a voice-over, the
student might rearrange the order of photographs or choose which photos
to show during particular audio clips, depending on the student's
reflection on the peer reviewer's questions.

Alternatively, the student might choose to keep the same format,
thinking that it best expresses what they hope to communicate. However,
the student might make revisions based on the peer reviewer's feedback
and their own reflection, in which the student mentions revising the
text, reordering photos, and changing the headline. Consider this
revision of the sample photo essay, in [\#](#).

<figure id="fig-00011">

</figure>

The author makes revisions according to peer reviewer feedback and
reflection of that feedback, particularly as it relates to purpose,
organization, and audience. To get a better sense of the revision
process, carefully examine the student's thought process.

I revised the headline from "The Syrian War" to "Remnants of
War---Syria." This headline is more engaging for readers and viewers and
better reflects the purpose of my project: to convey the desperate
situation in Syria resulting from the war that has ravaged citizens'
lives.

I changed the aesthetic by using a black-and-white filter on the photos.
Not only does this contrast with the white space and white text,
creating a more organized and cleaner look, it more effectively appeals
to readers' emotions by emphasizing the destitution left by the Syrian
War.

I rewrote the captions of the final three pictures to make them closer
to one another in word count, which is visually more pleasing. But even
more important, they create a more powerful narrative, building upon one
another.

I reordered the final two pictures, ending on what I consider the most
powerful image and most powerful statement: that 80 percent of the city
was uninhabitable after the war. I intend to increase viewers' emotional
responses with these changes.

Remember that you do not have to accept every suggestion a peer reviewer
makes, but do give each question and suggestion careful thought. Pay
close attention to your reviewer's questions and their perception of
your purpose and audience in particular, ensuring that they match yours.
And again, don't be afraid to experiment. One benefit of multimodal
composition, particularly when created with digital media, is that it is
relatively quick and easy to manipulate. One valuable tip is to
duplicate your work in different workspaces as you make changes, thus
saving the major elements of your project should something go wrong.
