m00108

ca7c53e6-1a40-4241-87b5-5ab816d1f4b5

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

The ways in which you approach and discuss debatable topics incorporate
critical thinking, critical reading, and critical writing. The reasoning
strategies discussed in this chapter reflect the patterns people use to
think critically and the structures with which writers and speakers
commonly build their arguments. These strategies are also the ones you
will use in most of your college writing projects, including your
assignments for [Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric](#)
and [Argumentative Research: Enhancing the Art of Rhetoric with
Evidence](#). Each strategy is a building block of logic; that is, each
is built on a pattern of thought, which you use out of the classroom as
well. For instance, you might approach a text or real-life situation in
some of the following ways:

Explain it in terms of something unrelated but more familiar.

Compare or contrast it with other texts or situations.

Group it in a category with similar texts or situations.

Consider it as a problem that needs to be solved.

Examine the reasons something happens or what happens as a result.

Explain what the text or situation means to you.

These thought patterns exemplify active critical thinking, which
translates into critical writing. In other words, writing patterns
reflect thinking patterns. By applying these reasoning patterns
appropriately and effectively, you will be able to incorporate the
evidence you need to support a thesis and persuade readers of the
validity of your argument. Remember, too, that these are skills, and
like other skills, the more you practice, the better you will get at
using them effectively. (You can read more about argument and logic in
[Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting the Art of Rhetoric](#).)
