m00109

aa667e81-b56e-437c-aad1-6be8509fcce4

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify key rhetorical concepts and thought patterns in a variety of
texts.

Explain how patterns of thought function for different audiences,
purposes, and situations.

For the purposes of this course, logic means "reasoning based on thought
and evidence." In practical terms, logic is the ability to analyze and
evaluate persuasive or argument writing for effectiveness. By extension,
it also means that you can learn to use logic in your own argumentative
writing. Like any other new skill, you are likely to learn best when you
have a starting point. Here are some suggestions for how to begin
thinking and writing logically:

Approach a topic with an open mind.

Consider what you already know about the topic.

Consider what you want to know about the topic.

Find credible information about the topic.

Base your judgments of the topic on sound reasoning and evidence.

Once you have formed your opinions on a particular debatable subject,
you must decide on the best way to organize them to share with others.
Developing your skills in six widely used reasoning strategies, or
patterns for thinking and writing, can help you determine the most
logical and effective means of organizing information to make your
points.

In this chapter, you will examine these six reasoning
strategies---analogy, cause and effect, classification and division,
comparison and contrast, problem and solution, and definition---that are
often used in college classes. In addition, you will consider how
writers' personal views, cultural backgrounds, and purposes for writing
help determine

which reasoning strategy suits their needs; and

what they decide to include in their writing.

As you progress in your college classes and beyond, you will find these
reasoning strategies used in all genres of writing, both nonfiction
(e.g., textbooks, how-to books) and fiction (e.g., novels, short
stories). Understanding how these strategies work can help you recognize
their common formats and analyze what you read; likewise, as a writer,
understanding how these strategies work to reflect your thinking can
help you determine the strategy you need to use.

# Analogy {#sect-00002}

Writers frequently use analogy as a strategy to compare two unlike
subjects---one subject is familiar to readers, whereas the other is not.
To explain or clarify the unfamiliar subject, the writer emphasizes the
way or ways in which the two subjects are similar, even though they are
dissimilar and unrelated in all other ways. Analogies are basically long
forms of similes (short comparisons of unlike elements, based on the
word *like* or *as*) or metaphors (short comparisons without signal
words). In the example paragraph, the writer explains unfamiliar aspects
of the COVID-19 pandemic by comparing it with the more familiar concept
of a robbery spree.

## Model Paragraph {#sect-00003}

Examining COVID-19 is like examining a robbery case in this way: both
require a great deal of investigation. Those investigating the causes
behind the pandemic look for the history of how the virus spread, and
those investigating a crime look for the backstory that might connect
the victims and criminals. In addition, the two groups of investigators
look at the reasons behind the focus of their study. Medical
investigators look at why the virus spread throughout the world; police
investigators look at why the crime spree took place in a particular
area. Also, both types of investigators are trying to stop whatever or
whoever is the focus of their investigation. Medical investigators want
to stop the virus; police investigators want to stop the crimes.

# Cause and Effect {#sect-00004}

Cause-and-effect writing identifies and examines the reasons (causes)
for and consequences (effects) of an action, event, or idea.
Cause-and-effect writing often answers the question "Why?" and helps
readers understand the connections between what happens because of---or
as a result of---something else.

## Model Paragraph {#sect-00005}

Ray's grocery, Artie's Hardware store, and Cradle and Teen department
store all went out of business because a well-known superstore opened in
Springdale. Customers who frequented Ray's, an establishment that had
been run by the same family for four generations, used to drive many
miles to take advantage of the high quality of items in the meat and
deli departments. After the opening of the superstore, however, those
same customers found they could get similar items at a savings, even if
the quality was not as high as the products at Ray's. Customers at
Artie's Hardware often talked with owner Artie Shoeman about their
hardware needs, but the store did not offer the same variety of items
they could find in the superstore. The same was true for those who
shopped at Cradle and Teen. The superstore featured lower prices and
more variety, even if the items did not match the quality of the items
at Cradle and Teen.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# Classification and Division {#sect-00006}

Classification and division are actually two closely related strategies,
generally discussed together because of their similarity. When using the
strategy of division, the writer identifies a single subject or group
and explains categories within that subject or group. In other words,
the writer divides the larger unit into component parts. When using the
strategy of classification, writers do the opposite. They group various
elements and place them into larger, more comprehensive categories
rather than divide the whole into parts. In general, the reasoning
strategy of classification and division looks at smaller elements as
parts of a larger element and thus helps readers understand a general
concept and the elements that it comprises.

## Model Paragraphs {#sect-00007}

Extra material in the textbook can be divided into photographs,
quotations, and tables. The photographs were all taken by the author and
focus on various parts of the life cycle of the plants highlighted in
the chapter. In addition, to add color and more information about the
subject matter of each chapter, the author has inserted sidebar
quotations from both famous and non-famous people. The tables the author
has included help readers see more details about the progression of the
plants' spread across the country.

After three months of training, the young dogs were placed into three
categories: those who would go directly to permanent homes, those who
would repeat the course, and those who would advance to the next level.
The dogs that would be homed immediately were those who were far too
social or far too active to be service dogs. The dogs that would repeat
the course had possibilities as service dogs but needed more discipline
and instruction. Their futures were yet to be decided. Those that
advanced to the next level were obedient and focused and learned
quickly. They displayed great promise as service dogs.

# Comparison and Contrast {#sect-00009}

Compare and contrast, one of the most frequently used reasoning
strategies, analyzes two (sometimes more) subjects, examining the
similarities (comparisons) and differences (contrasts) between them.
Nearly everything you can think of can be a subject for comparison and
contrast: objects, people, concepts, places, movies, literature, and
styles, to name a few. To elaborate on the separate points, writers
provide details about each element being compared or contrasted.
Comparison and contrast helps readers analyze and evaluate subjects.

This strategy is helpful when the similarities or differences are *not*
obvious and when a significant common thread exists between the
subjects. For example, a contrast between an expensive, elegant
restaurant and a fast-food restaurant would be useless because the
differences are clearly obvious, despite the common thread---both are
restaurants. However, *not* so obvious might be some similarities.

When subjects have no common thread or have obvious shared
characteristics, any comparison or contrast makes little sense---like
contrasting a fish and a shoe (no common thread) or comparing two
fast-food restaurants (obvious similarities). However, a writer actually
might find a common thread between a fish and a shoe (perhaps shine or
texture or color), and a valid topic of contrast might be differences
between the two fast-food restaurants.

## Model Paragraph {#sect-00010}

Although they seem different on the surface, one way in which
Romantic-period poetry and 1980s rap music are alike is the desire the
writers had to create a new approach to their art. They wanted to
represent simpler values that were more connected to the natural world,
values to which a general audience could relate. For example, in William
Wordsworth's "Daffodils," the speaker can escape the depressing,
industrialized urban world to find peace in nature by contemplating a
field of flowers. Similarly, in the Sugarhill Gang's 1979 "Rapper's
Delight," the band sings of how their beats can lift spirits and cause
listeners to dance and forget their woes. However, Romantic-period
poetry and 1980s rap music are different in the delivery style and form
of the art; "Rapper's Delight" is set to music, which is an integral
part of the piece, but "Daffodils" is not.

# Problem and Solution {#sect-00011}

When using this reasoning strategy, writers introduce a predicament or
challenging issue (the problem) and offer information about what was
done or what should be done to remedy the predicament or issue (the
solution). Problem-and-solution writing helps readers understand the
complexities of some predicaments and the actions that can improve or
eliminate them.

## Model Paragraph {#sect-00012}

The issue of combating the spread of hate speech and misinformation on
social media can be addressed if more social media providers improve
their monitoring services. Aside from creating more algorithms that
search for linked key words and phrases, social media providers should
increase the number of professional monitors conducting active searches.
Additionally, while many platforms such as Twitter and Facebook respond
within a few days to reports of posts that violate their policies, more
monitors could lessen the amount of time these posts are available.
According to Facebook, inappropriate posts are investigated and removed
within 24 to 48 hours (Facebook "Community Standards"). Some offenders
have been reported multiple times for their platform violations, and
social media sponsors should increase their monitoring of those
offenders. Although such surveillance would increase the burden on the
social media providers, it would help solve the growing challenge of
online hate speech and misinformation.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

# Definition {#sect-00013}

When using the reasoning strategy of definition, writers elaborate on
the meaning of an idea, a word, or an expression, usually one that is
controversial or that can be viewed in multiple ways. Beginning writers
tend to think that definition writing looks only at the denotation, or
dictionary definition. However, definition writing entails much more
than relaying a dictionary definition. It also explains and elaborates
on the connotations, the emotions and implications the topic evokes.
Definition writing is especially useful for explaining and interpreting
terms, ideas, or concepts that are easily or often confused or that have
meanings beyond their denotations. Sometimes these meanings are personal
interpretations and thus reflect a writer's particular viewpoint.
Additionally, this strategy is beneficial when writers want to explain
or reinforce a term before making an argument about a larger concept.

## Model Paragraph {#sect-00014}

In everyday speech, the word *critical* is often used to highlight
negative aspects of a topic. If someone says a friend was critical of a
new haircut, the implication is that the friend did not like the cut.
However, when used in college classes, *critical* has an expanded
meaning: noting both the negative and positive aspects of a topic,
examining those aspects in depth, and then making decisions about the
discoveries. Students directed to use critical thinking, critical
reading, or critical writing should know they are expected to examine
all sides of a topic fully, evaluate the validity of those sides, and
then make sound judgments on the basis of their evaluation.

In this chapter, you have learned about various reasoning strategies
that you may use in academic and professional writing. Utilizing these
strategies when you write can help you both evaluate and analyze text
that you read and create more logical and persuasive arguments.
