m00111

e9d10cf0-4319-4130-9948-c3e926f21b0a

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify and define reasoning strategies and signal words.

Determine how the rhetorical situation influences the content and
reasoning strategies of written works.

As you read in [The Digital World: Building on What You Already Know to
Respond Critically](#), rhetorical situation are shaped by the
conditions of the communication and the agents involved in that
communication. To help you determine the conditions and the agents, you
can examine purpose, culture, and audience expectation.

The purpose, or intention, for your writing determines the reasoning
strategies you use. For example, if your purpose is to explain why one
restaurant is better than another, you likely would use comparison and
contrast.

Writers of essays and other formal papers usually support their ideas by
using more than one reasoning strategy. For example, within comparison
and contrast, they may include description, such as sensory details
about the food at the two restaurants; narration, such as an anecdote
about why they and their companions went to the restaurants or about
something that happened at one of the restaurants; and sequencing, such
as the order in which they received their food or the directions to get
to the restaurants.

Alternatively, writers may combine some of the six strategies already
mentioned. For instance, within the larger structure of comparison and
contrast, they may use classification and division when discussing the
restaurants' menus, sorting by main dishes, side dishes, appetizers,
soups, salads, and desserts. Therefore, while the essay's primary
purpose may be to compare and contrast, individual strategies within an
essay or even within a paragraph may differ.

# Recognizing Purpose {#sect-00002}

Throughout your paper, your purpose for writing should be clear and
focused. Your introduction, thesis, topic sentences, body paragraphs
(which include reasoning and evidence), and conclusion should all
reflect your argumentative or persuasive purpose.

To support and clarify your purpose, you are likely to use the
following:

Analogy

:

to explain to readers a subject with which they are unfamiliar by
comparing a specific trait or traits with those of a more familiar
subject.

Cause-and-effect

:

to provide a clear understanding of the relationship between an event or
situation and/or what happened because of it, why it occurred, and what
might continue to happen.

Classification and division:

to explain a subject by breaking it into smaller parts and explaining
the distinctions of the smaller parts or by grouping individual,
disparate elements on the basis of certain characteristics to form
larger units.

Compare and contrast

:

to examine the similarities and/or differences of subjects in order to
explain a specific point about their similarity or difference (often an
unexpected similarity or difference).

Problem-and-solution

:

to indicate a predicament or difficulty and suggest ways to deal with or
eliminate it.

Definition

:

to illustrate to readers an idea, word, or expression, allowing you to
explain a unique meaning of a topic through details and analysis.

# Recognizing Audience {#sect-00003}

Critically thinking about the culture, or common beliefs and lived
experiences, of your audience, the people who will read your work, can
help you choose an appropriate vocabulary and level of detail.

The culture and audience expectation determine the language you use, the
amount and type of information you include, and the way you deliver that
information. Determine first what your readers want to know (their
expectations), what they already know, and what they do not know.
Determining---or at least making an educated guess about---the culture
of your audience will aid you in deciding how to use the reasoning
strategy you choose and the way in which you present your paper.

Suppose, for instance, your purpose is to persuade your audience to vote
for a proposed local ordinance. First, consider the culture of your
audience to ensure the language you use clearly explains the terms of
ordinance for those who know nothing about it. Also, be sure that you
fully understand the issues surrounding the ordinance and how it might
have different effects on different groups of people so that what you
assert is accurate. Next, again consider the culture of your audience
members and what they may or may not know about your topic. For example,
they may not know the reason for the proposed ordinance, what might
happen if it is passed or not passed, or how it might affect them
personally or culturally. If they are not as informed as you are, then
include the background information they need to know about it in order
for your reasoning strategy and overall argument to be effective.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Depending on your audience, you may want to include an analogy to help
readers understand connections and particular points in certain ways. An
analogy is also useful if the subject is complex. You can make a complex
subject more accessible for your audience by comparing it to something
familiar.

# Recognizing Points {#sect-00004}

Every point you make in a paper should be meaningful and should relate
to the paper's thesis, its overarching claim or angle. How you make each
point is determined by your reason for making that point. In most
academic writing, you will use structures that present a thesis at the
beginning of the essay. Readers should recognize your thesis because of

its prominent placement in the essay;

the language you use leading up to it; and

the language you use following it.

For example, if your thesis is that the first two years of college
should be tuition free for students (that is, tuition should be
subsidized by the state), then you might begin your essay with an
attention-getting fact stating that the current national student debt is
over \$1.7 trillion. After that, you might share evidence about the
number of students who do not finish a bachelor's degree but have
accrued student loan debt. Finally, you might preview your reasons for
the position advocating for free tuition for the first two years of
college.

Readers will recognize your supporting points as stated in your
paragraph-level topic sentences because of how you discuss them in
relation to your thesis. In all of your academic writing, choose
language and reasoning strategies that guide readers back to your
thesis.

When you present facts, whether in your thesis or in your evidence,
remember to cite them properly according to the format your instructor
requires. For more about proper citations, see [MLA Documentation and
Format](#) and [APA Documentation and Format](#).

# Structuring Your Reasoning Strategies {#sect-00005}

To present your reasoning, which is the main part of your essay, try
these suggestions for using the six strategies:

Analogy paragraphs often begin with a statement of comparison between
two unlike subjects, followed by reasons, explanations, or analyses of
their similarities.

*Example topic 1:* compare enrolling as a first-year student to visiting
an amusement park for the first time

*Example sentence:* Enrolling as a first-year student is like visiting
an amusement park for the first time in this way: the inexperienced
students and park goers must pay a high fee, abide by strict rules, and
choose how they spend their adventure.

*Example topic 2:* compare increasing the federal deficit to eating
salted peanuts

*Example sentence:* Increasing the federal deficit is like eating salted
peanuts: the higher the increase, the more will be demanded. When you
eat salted peanuts, the more you eat, the more you want.

Paragraphs explaining cause-and-effect often begin in one of these two
ways: (1) an explanation of the cause(s), followed by an explanation of
the effect(s) that happened as a result of the cause(s); or (2) an
explanation of the effect(s), followed by an explanation of the cause(s)
that led to the effect(s).

*Example topic 1:* how an oil spill affected animals, waterways, and
environmental costs

*Example sentence:* Because an oil spill occurred off the coast of
California, the fur and feathers of animals became dangerously matted,
waterways were damaged, and the cost of maintaining a clean environment
skyrocketed.

*Example topic 2:* how the pandemic affected the population

*Example sentence:* Because of the pandemic, gas consumption dropped,
indoor dining at restaurants declined, and online shopping rose.

*Example topic 3:* how animals, waterways, and environmental costs were
affected by an oil spill

*Example sentence:* The fur and feathers of animals became dangerously
matted, waterways were damaged, and the cost of maintaining a clean
environment skyrocketed as the result of an oil spill off the coast of
California.

*Example topic 4:* how the pandemic affected the population

*Example sentence*: Gas consumption dropped, indoor dining at
restaurants declined, and online shopping rose because of the pandemic.

Classification-and-division paragraphs often begin in either of two
ways: (1) Classification paragraphs identify individual items and place
them in a larger group; and (2) Division paragraphs break a large group
or a single unit into smaller parts.

*Example classification topic:* essential workers during the pandemic
included employees in several fields

*Example sentence:* During the pandemic, essential workers not under
quarantine included employees in the fields of health care, childcare,
transportation, water and wastewater, and agriculture and food
production.

*Example division topic:* how the new superstore will be divided

*Example sentence:* The layout for the new superstore will be divided
into furniture (third floor), household goods and kitchenware (second
floor), and men's, women's, and children's clothing (first floor).

When using compare and contrast reasoning, you have choices about the
structure to use. Comparison-and-contrast paragraphs identify two
subjects and address their similarities and then their differences; or
comparison-and-contrast paragraphs identify two subjects and address
their similarities and then their differences.

*Example topic 1:* reality television and scripted television

*Example sentence:* Reality television and scripted television are alike
in that both should make money for the network that airs them; however,
they differ in the predictability of what the characters do in their
roles.

*Example topic 2:* printed book and audio book

*Example sentence:* A printed book and an audio book are alike in that
both present the material the author wrote; one way they differ is that
listeners---as opposed to readers---cannot make notes on text in a
printed book.

*Example topic 3:* reality television and scripted television

*Example sentence:* Reality television and scripted television differ in
the predictability of what the characters do in their roles, but they
are alike in that they both should make money for the network that airs
them.

*Example topic 4:* printed book and audio book

*Example sentence:* One way a printed book and an audio book differ is
that listeners---as opposed to readers---cannot make notes on material
in the printed book; however, both present the material the author
wrote.

You can develop a problem-and-solution paragraph in one of two ways: (1)
identify the problem, and then explain a way to solve it; or (2) explain
the solution to a problem, and then identify the problem(s) that
necessitated it.

*Example topic 1:* student loans

*Example sentence:* The issue of defaulting on repayment of student
loans would be solved by increasing the time the students are given to
repay the loans.

*Example topic 2:* campus parking

*Example sentence:* The issue of the increased need for parking on
campus would be solved by paving the area on the corner of Twelfth and
Locust Streets to allow parking on that lot.

*Example topic 3:* student loans

*Example sentence:* By increasing the time in which student loans must
be repaid, the issue of defaulting on repayment of student loans would
be solved, and students could have more ease of mind to pursue their
careers.

*Example topic 4:* campus parking

*Example sentence* By paving the area on the corner of Twelfth and
Locust Streets to allow parking on that lot, the issue of the increased
need for parking on campus would be solved, an eyesore would be
beautified, and more students and faculty would get to class on time.

Definition paragraphs often begin by noting the dictionary definition
(denotation) of the topic and then illustrating and explaining its
unique or extended meaning.

*Example topic 1:* patriotism

*Example sentence:* Most people think patriotism is showing devotion to
their country; to me, however, it is conducting myself in ways that are
respectful to everyone.

*Example topic 2:* independence

*Example sentence:* Independence means freedom from outside control, but
college students often find it brings personal responsibility they had
not considered.

# Integrating Evidence from Appropriate Sources {#sect-00006}

Most academic writing is built on the writer's own ideas as supported by
the ideas of others. Regardless of the reasoning strategies you use in
an essay, you will usually need to integrate others' ideas to

help you explore a topic;

define, illustrate, explain, or prove an idea;

help readers think critically about an idea; and

give strength or credibility to your ideas.

These ideas from others could come from a variety of sources such as
print or electronic media or in-person conversations. Similarly, these
sources could be either personal (e.g., a conversation you had with
someone or an email you received) or public (e.g., available online or
in a printed publication). You can read more about finding and using
credible sources in [Research Process: Accessing and Recording
Information](#) and [Annotated Bibliography: Gathering, Evaluating, and
Documenting Sources](#).

These models show how writers integrate ideas from appropriate sources
into their reasoning strategies.

## Analogy {#sect-00007}

Enrolling as a first-year student is like going to an amusement park for
the first time: the inexperienced students or park goers must pay a high
fee, abide by many rules, and choose their adventures. Like the cost for
riding roller coasters, the cost for taking college classes is great and
must be paid before the students start their journey. However, even
after paying tuition, students do not have immediate access to whatever
class they want to take, just as the park visitor cannot jump on any
ride at any time. In the park, certain rides have warnings, such as "You
must be at least 60 inches tall to go on this ride." In college, many
classes have prerequisites or require students to have earned a minimum
placement score. Also, even though park goers have paid their entrance
fees and received armbands that allow them to go anywhere in the park,
they are not guaranteed a place on that one awesome ride they have heard
so much about. They may have to choose between waiting in a line for
hours or doing something else and trying to catch that ride another
time. Similarly, college classes have a limited number of seats. Like
the roller coaster that everyone wants to ride, college classes close,
and students must make another choice. So, while students may not be
able to pick up that class that semester, they can try again the next
term. Like those starting an adventure at an amusement park, those
starting the college journey should have a plan of how they want to fill
their time and have a backup plan should they be unable to get every
class they want, according to Max Vega, a first-year adviser. Similarly,
park goers should use a map to plan their adventure.

## Cause and Effect {#sect-00008}

Because an oil spill occurred off the coast of California, the fur and
feathers of many animals became dangerously matted, waterways were
damaged, and the cost of maintaining a clean environment skyrocketed. In
May 2015, a ruptured pipeline in Santa Barbara County spilled oil along
20 miles of coastline. According to information published by the
University of California-Davis, wildlife rescuers were able to save 49
coastal birds, 25 sea lions, and 6 elephant seals (Kerlin, "Wildlife
Experience High Price of Oil"). Helping ecosystems recover from oil
spills is difficult and can take decades and billions of dollars to
recover even partially.

## Classification and Division {#sect-00009}

The layout for the new superstore can be divided into furniture (third
floor), household goods and kitchenware (second floor), and men's,
women's, and children's clothing (first floor). This arrangement allows
customers to feel they have control over their shopping experience.
Customers shopping for clothes are not distracted by household goods or
furniture displays. "By categorizing our merchandise in this manner, we
can further subdivide the merchandise on each floor, developing a
logical system of separation that repeat customers will learn easily,"
said Carla Dawkins, general manager for Hometown Corner Store, in a
*Curtisville News* report (Thurston 2). These subdivisions, Thurston
stated, would allow individual floor managers to design the footprint of
their floors to create an originality distinct and separate from the
other floors (8).

## Comparison and Contrast {#sect-00010}

One way *Romeo and Juliet* and *Macbeth* are alike is that both are
tragedies written by William Shakespeare; one way they differ is that
they explore different themes. In *Romeo and Juliet*, almost all action
centers on the theme of love, whether it is the innocent love between
two young people or the protective love of parents for their children.
In *Macbeth*, however, the action centers on ambition. The characters
act on their ambitions for themselves and for their country, but
excessive ambition is condemned and severely punished (Royal Shakespeare
Company, "*Macbeth* Analysis").

## Problem and Solution {#sect-00011}

The issue of the increased need for parking on campus would be solved by
paving the area on the corner of Twelfth and Locust Streets to allow
parking on that lot. According to an email sent to all students from the
provost, Dr. Sandra Kuryakin, the college purchased the corner lot two
years ago with the intent of creating more parking spaces. In the email,
Dr. Kuryakin adds, "We will break ground in June and plan to have the
lot finished before students are back on campus in August, thus solving
our parking problem on the west end of campus."

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

## Definition {#sect-00012}

Most people think patriotism means showing devotion to their country; to
me, however, it is conducting myself in ways that are respectful to
everyone. Too often, people proclaim themselves as patriots when they
are actively seeking to withhold liberties from their fellow citizens or
even harm them. When those claiming to be patriots condemn and
physically harm others because they do not agree on political issues,
they are not showing any reverence for their country. Instead, they
dishonor their country by dishonoring its people. Respecting America
should mean more than saluting the flag or singing the national anthem.
It should mean respecting others' rights to life, liberty, and the
pursuit of happiness. In light of all this, for me, patriotism means
respecting others not only because they are fellow Americans but because
they are fellow human beings.

# Signal Words and Phrases {#sect-00013}

Writers use signal words and phrases to steer readers in certain
directions. You might use signal words and phrases to give readers clues
about

how one idea connects with another;

how one paragraph connects with another;

how one idea supports or refutes another;

what is to come;

points you want to emphasize;

illustrations of your topic; or

similarities or differences you want to emphasize.

Common signal words and phrases for reasoning strategies include these:

Analogy

  ------------------------- ------------------------- ------------------------
  accordingly               for instance              in relation to
  as has been shown         given that                in the same way (that)
  as noted                  granted that              in this way
  as previously discussed   having established that   ironically
  as previously mentioned   in addition               paradoxically
  as . . . so               in contrast               similarly
  by extension              in fact                   specifically
  compared with             in parallel               the aforementioned
  for example               in particular             thus
  ------------------------- ------------------------- ------------------------

Cause-and-effect

  ------------------------ ---------------- -----------------
  because (of)             in order to      since
  begins with              in that          the reason is
  for                      is caused by     this led to
  for this reason          leads (led) to   for this reason
  if this (that) happens   reason           
  ------------------------ ---------------- -----------------

Effect

  ------------------ ----------------- -----------
  as a consequence   for this reason   outcome
  as a result (of)   hence             result
  as expected        it follows that   so (that)
  because (of)       namely            therefore
  consequently       on account of     thus
  ------------------ ----------------- -----------

Classification

  ----------------- ------------ -------------
  aspects           feature(s)   part(s)
  characteristics   field        rank
  classes           form(s)      second
  classify          genre(s)     set(s)
  comprises         group(s)     several
  consists of       kinds        sort(s)
  dimension(s)      methods      stage(s) of
  element(s)        numbers      types
  various           ways         
  ----------------- ------------ -------------

Division

  ---------------- ---------------- ---------------
  another          is composed of   style(s)
  category(-ies)   kind(s)          type(s)
  contain(s)       one              variety(-ies)
  first            other            
  include(s)       sort(s)          
  ---------------- ---------------- ---------------

Compare and contrast

  ---------------------- ------------------ --------------
  alike                  compared with      same (as)
  along the same lines   in comparison      share
  as well as             in like manner     similar(ly)
  both                   in the same way    similar (to)
  each                   is comparable to   the same as
  equal(ly)              just as            too
  in common              likewise           
  ---------------------- ------------------ --------------

Contrast

  ---------------- ------------------- ------------------
  although         but                 difference
  and yet          by (in) contrast    different (from)
  as opposed to    compared with       either/or
  better           conversely          even though
  however          on the contrary     yet
  instead (of)     on the other hand   so (that)
  more/less than   unequal             therefore
  neither/nor      vary                
  nevertheless     whereas             
  ---------------- ------------------- ------------------

Problem

  ------------ ------------------- -----------------
  catch        factors (include)   puzzle
  challenge    hitch               quandary
  conundrum    issue               riddle
  crisis       obstruction         situation
  difficulty   pose                snag
  dilemma      predicament         the question is
  enigma       problem(atic)       
  ------------ ------------------- -----------------

Solution

  ---------------------- --------------------- ---------------
  a (one) solution       cure                  one answer is
  address                deal with             option
  alleviate              ease                  possibility
  ameliorate             explain/explanation   probability
  amend                  fix                   propose
  answer                 improve               proposition
  correct                lighten               prospect
  reason                 solution              treat(ment)
  remedy                 solve                 way out
  resolution (resolve)   take care of          
  ---------------------- --------------------- ---------------

Definition

  ------------------------ --------------------------- -------------------------
  according to (source)    for this reason (purpose)   not only . . . but also
  also                     further(more)               on the contrary
  as a result              however                     on the other hand
  at the same              in addition to              otherwise
  because                  in brief                    rather
  besides                  in conclusion               similarly
  but                      in fact                     since
  consequently             in other words              so
  conversely               in particular               such as
  equally important        likewise                    then
  finally                  namelyx                     therefore
  first (second, etc.)     nevertheless                to illustrate
  for example (instance)   next                        
  ------------------------ --------------------------- -------------------------

# Frequently Used Reasoning Strategies Terms {#sect-00014}

Audience

:

the people who will read your paper.

Description

:

writing in which the author attempts to depict certain characteristics
of a person, place, or object. Writers describe their subjects by
carefully noting details and sensory impressions, such as what the
subject looks, sounds, smells, tastes, or feels like.

Metaphors

:

comparison of two unlike elements. For example, the arguing protestors
were volcanic, spewing hot, inflammatory speech.

Narration

:

telling a story or relating events.

Point

:

an important idea to share with the audience.

Purpose

:

reason for writing.

Sequencing

:

relating information in the order in which something happened or in
which steps should be followed.

Similes

:

comparison of two unlike elements. The word

as

or

like

appears in a simile. For example, the protestors' arguments were as
heated as an erupting volcano.

Thesis

:

the overarching and unifying idea of a piece of writing.
