m00113

3d2cf2b3-f279-404c-8ecd-1d487501168a

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Use organizational and reasoning strategies to compose texts that
integrate the writer's ideas with those from appropriate sources.

Implement varying language structures in the process of composing.

Develop flexible strategies for drafting and revising.

In this section you will practice writing paragraphs that demonstrate
your ability to use the reasoning strategies discussed.

# Summary of Assignment {#sect-00002}

Using three of the strategies for reasoning (analogy, cause and effect,
classification and division, comparison and contrast, definition, or
problem and solution), write at least three body paragraphs for your
[Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric](#) assignment. Write
at least one single paragraph for each strategy you choose. You may
write additional paragraphs in which you combine strategies.

Another Lens. Make a visual draft of your assignment by using photos you
take, images you find online (be sure to adhere to copyright
guidelines), images you create, or a combination of these. Your
instructor will tell you whether to substitute visuals for all three
paragraphs or just one or two. Put the title at the top of your poster
and, if necessary, include explanations of your images. The images you
use and the manner in which you arrange them should convey the same
ideas you want to express about your subject in writing. The selected
images should reflect your critical thinking on your subject and should
invite the viewer also to think critically about your subject. You can
read more about understanding various aspects of visual rhetoric in
Image Analysis: Writing About What You See. Although the design
arrangements, or layouts, for a poster are numerous, consider using one
of these:

Centered image---nucleus idea:

The primary image is in the center of the poster. Other secondary images
radiate outward from the primary image or are arranged around it another
meaningful way.

Left-to-right flow---horizontal:

Images progress across the poster like lines of text, from left to
right.

Left-to-right flow---vertical:

Images progress across the poster like lines of text in a column.
Depending on the size of your poster, you could include from three to
five columns of images.

Two contrasting fields:

Images are divided into two sections of the poster, some on the left and
some on the right.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

# Structural Paragraph Frames {#sect-00003}

Once you have determined your reasoning strategy and purpose for a
particular paragraph, consider how to develop the evidence within that
paragraph through a topic sentence, explanation, and analysis. To do
this task, choose the most appropriate structure for a given paragraph
from the structures below, and complete the frame according to the
prompts. You may alter the frames as needed. Remember that each
paragraph that you develop should support your thesis. In other words,
make sure that each topic sentence ties back to your thesis.

*First, record your working thesis:* \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Analogy                                                               |
|                                                                       |
| Working topic sentence \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ is like           |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ in many ways.                      |
|                                                                       |
| *Structure*                                                           |
|                                                                       |
| explanation: analysis:                                                |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Cause-and-Effect                                                     |
|                                                                      |
| *Working topic sentence for Structure #1* Because (cause/s)          |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (what had happened), (effect/s)             |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (what happened as a result). *Structure #1  |
| for cause-and-effect paragraph* cause(s): effect(s): *Working topic  |
| sentence for Structure #2* (effect/s) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ |
| (what happened as a result) because                                  |
| (cause/s)\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (what had happened). *Structure #2 |
| for cause-and-effect paragraph* cause(s): effect(s):                 |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+

+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Classification and Division                                          |
|                                                                      |
| *Working topic sentence for Structure #1* (general subject)          |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ can be divided into (smaller categories)  |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, and    |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. *Structure #1 for                        |
| classification-and-division paragraphs: division* larger subject:    |
| first category: second category: third category: *Working topic      |
| sentence for Structure #2* (smaller category)                        |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, and    |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ are (types) of (larger subject)           |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. *Structure #2 for                            |
| classification-and-division paragraph: classification* smaller       |
| category: smaller category: smaller category: larger subject:        |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+

+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Comparison and Contrast                                              |
|                                                                      |
| *Working topic sentence for Structure #1* One way in which (subject  |
| 1)\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and (subject 2)\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ are alike |
| is (similarity) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_; one way in which they differ is    |
| (difference) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. *Structure #1 for                     |
| comparison-and-contrast paragraph* Subject 1: Subject 2:             |
| Similarity(-ies) of subject 1 and subject 2: Difference(s) of        |
| subject 1 and subject 2: *Working topic sentence for Structure #2*   |
| One way in which (subject 1) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and (subject 2)      |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ are different is (difference)\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_;    |
| one way in which they are similar is (similarity)\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.   |
| *Structure #2 for comparison-and-contrast paragraph* Subject 1:      |
| Subject 2: Difference(s) of subject 1 and subject 2:                 |
| Similarity(-ies) of subject 1 and subject 2:                         |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+

+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Problem-and-Solution                                                 |
|                                                                      |
| *Working topic sentence for Structure #1* The issue of (predicament  |
| or challenge) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ was/can be  |
| solved by (what was/should be                                        |
| done)\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. *Structure #1 for |
| problem-and-solution paragraph* problem(s): solution: *Working topic |
| sentence for Structure #2* By (what was/should be done)              |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, the issue of           |
| (predicament/challenge) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_         |
| was/could be solved. *Structure #2 for problem-and-solution          |
| paragraph* solution: problem(s):                                     |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+

+----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Definition                                                           |
|                                                                      |
| *Working topic sentence* Most people think                           |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ means \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_; to  |
| me, however, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ means                        |
| \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_. *Structure* Common         |
| definition or denotation: Expanded definition from writer:           |
+----------------------------------------------------------------------+

# Reasoning Strategies {#sect-00004}

As you write, keep in mind the reasoning strategy you are using. Then
begin your draft by using the applicable frame for the paragraph.
Beginning in this way will help you focus the details of the paragraph
to ensure they support the thesis and provide the reasoning you need.
Note that when you revise, you may choose to reword your frame and the
sentences that develop it. Revisions like these are part of the
recursive nature of the writing process.

Below are frames for types of writing, sample sentences of filled-in
frames, patterns for the six reasoning strategies, and sample
paragraphs. In the sample paragraphs, topic sentences are underlined,
and transitional words and phrases are italicized.

## Analogy {#sect-00005}

*Frame for analogy topic sentence:* (subject 1)
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ is like (subject 2)
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ in this way: (way in which they are
similar)\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

*Learning a foreign language* is like *learning to ride a bicycle* in
this way: *you must learn to perform multiple tasks, some at the same
time*.

*Structure for analogy paragraph comparing learning a foreign language
and learning to ride a bicycle:*

*comparison:* learning a foreign language compared to learning to ride a
bicycle

*reason/explanation/analysis*: must learn the basic parts

*reason/explanation/analysis*: must learn how parts work together

*reason/explanation/analysis*: must learn multiple actions without
thinking about them

### Model analogy paragraph {#sect-00006}

*Learning a foreign language is like learning to ride a bicycle: you
must learn to perform multiple tasks, some at the same time.* You
*first* have to develop a foundational knowledge by learning how the
individual parts of the bike work and how to use them, just as you learn
the parts of speech of a language. *Then* you must learn how these parts
work together. *For example*, through the action of pedaling the bike,
you transfer energy to the wheels, causing them to rotate, *thus* moving
the bike forward. *Similarly*, by learning how to use verbs in another
language, you learn how to apply meaning that expresses an action or
state of being. To steer the direction of the bike, you learn to change
its path by turning the handlebars. To change the direction of a
sentence, you learn how to control prepositions and modifiers. *Most
important, though*, you must get to the point at which the actions of
pedaling, steering, and balancing happen simultaneously and with little
thought to the individual actions, just as you must do when speaking a
foreign language.

## Cause and Effect {#sect-00007}

*Frame for cause-and-effect topic sentence (Structure #1):*

Because (cause/s) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (what had happened),
then (effect/s) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (what happened).

Because *vehicles sped without regard to the speed limit, pedestrians
dodged traffic and accidents increased*; for those reasons, *a traffic
signal was installed*.

*Structure #1 for cause-and effect paragraph about reasons for
installing a traffic signal:*

*explanation of the cause(s), followed by an explanation of the
effect(s) that happened as a result of the cause(s)*

*cause:* vehicles sped without regard to the speed limit

*cause*: pedestrians had to dodge traffic

*cause:* number of accidents increased

*effect:* traffic signal was installed

### Model cause-and-effect paragraph about reasons for installing a traffic signal (Structure #1) {#sect-00008}

*Many vehicles raced through the intersection of Clay Street and Eagle
Avenue without regard to the posted speed limit.* Pedestrians, many of
whom were students, crossed the intersection to get to and from campus,
*but* they had to dodge in and out of constant traffic. The number of
accidents rose far past an acceptable limit. *Indeed,* one recent
accident caused a loss of life. *For these reasons*, a traffic signal
was installed at the intersection of Clay Street and Eagle Avenue.

*Frame for a cause-and-effect topic sentence (Structure #2):*

(effect/s) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (what happened) because
(cause/s) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (what had happened).

*A traffic signal was installed* because *vehicles sped, people had to
dodge traffic, and accidents increased*.

*Structure #2 for cause-and effect paragraph about reasons for
installing a traffic signal:*

*explanation of the effect(s), followed by an explanation of the
causes(s*) *that led to the effect*

*effect:* traffic signal was installed

*cause:* vehicles sped without regard to speed limit

*cause:* pedestrians had to dodge traffic

*cause:* number of accidents increased

### Model cause-and-effect paragraph about reasons for installing a traffic signal (Structure #2) {#sect-00009}

*A traffic signal was installed at the intersection of Clay Street and
Eagle Avenue.* *Before* it was installed, many vehicles raced through
the intersection without regard to the posted speed limit. Pedestrians,
many of whom were students, crossed the intersection to get to and from
campus, *but* they had to dodge in and out of constant traffic. The
number of accidents rose far past an acceptable limit. *Indeed,* one
recent accident resulted in a loss of life.

## Classification and Division {#sect-00010}

Notice that these paragraphs do not separate classification from
division. Rather, they look at the same larger unit (sports drinks) from
two angles: types of drinks that could be classified and the larger
unit---sports drinks---broken down into smaller units contained within
it.

*Frame for classification-and-division topic sentence (Structure #1):*
(general subject) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ can be divided into (smaller
categories) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_,
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, and \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

*Sports drinks* can be divided into *hypotonic*, *isotonic*, and
*hypertonic*.

*Structure #1 for classification-and-division paragraph about types of
sports drinks:*

*identification of the general subject followed by categories of that
general subject*

*general subject*: sports drinks

*first category*: hypotonic

*second category*: isotonic

*third category*: hypertonic

### Model classification-and-division paragraph about types of sports drinks (Structure #1) {#sect-00011}

*All sports drinks are designed to increase hydration before, during,
and after exercise or athletic involvement.* They do this by replacing
minerals *such as* sodium and potassium lost through sweat and by
replacing electrolytes and carbohydrates. *However*, not all sports
drinks are created equally. The *first* type of sports drink, hypotonic
(having a lower concentration of dissolved content than the human body),
includes drinks that have both a low number of carbohydrates and a
higher concentration of salt and sugar than the human body. Isotonic
(having the same concentration of dissolved content as the human body)
drinks have salt and sugar concentrations similar to the human body but
have higher carbohydrate content. *Last*, hypertonic (having a higher
concentration of dissolved content than the human body) drinks are
designed to supplement daily carbohydrate intake *and therefore* have
high levels of carbohydrates to provide quick energy replacement. Their
salt and sugar concentration is significantly lower than the human
body's.

*Frame for classification-and-division topic sentence (Structure #2):*

(smaller categories) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_,
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, and \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ are
divisions /types of (general subject)\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

*Hypotonic*, *isotonic*, and *hypertonic* are types of *sports drinks*.

*Structure #2 for classification-and-division paragraph about types of
sports drinks:*

*categories of general subject followed by identification of the general
subject*

*smaller category*: hypotonic

*smaller category*: isotonic

*smaller category*: hypertonic

*general subject*: sports drinks

### Model classification-and-division paragraph about types of sports drinks (Structure #2) {#sect-00012}

Hypotonic (having a lower concentration of dissolved content than the
human body) drinks include beverages that have both a low number of
carbohydrates *and* a concentration of salt and sugar higher than the
human body. Isotonic (having the same concentration of dissolved content
as the human body) beverages have salt and sugar concentrations similar
to the human body but have higher carbohydrate content. *Last*,
hypertonic (having a higher concentration of dissolved content than the
human body) beverages are designed to supplement daily carbohydrate
intake *and therefore* have high levels of carbohydrate to provide quick
energy replacement. Their salt and sugar concentration is significantly
lower than the human body's. What do these beverages have in common?
*All are types of sports drinks, designed to increase hydration before,
during, and after exercise or athletic involvement.*

## Comparison and Contrast {#sect-00013}

*Frame for a comparison-and-contrast topic sentence (Structure #1):*

One way (subject 1) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and (subject 2)
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ are alike is (similarity) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_; one
way they differ is (difference) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

One way *virtual learning* and *face-to-face learning* are alike is
*that student responsibility is a key element in both*; one way they
differ is *in the methods students choose to be attentive*.

*Structure #1 for comparison-and-contrast paragraph about virtual
learning and face-to-face learning:*

*identification of two subjects followed by a point-by-point discussion*

*point 1:* discussion of a similarity of virtual learning and
face-to-face learning

*point 2:* discussion of a difference between virtual learning and
face-to-face learning

### Model comparison-and-contrast paragraph about virtual learning and face-to-face learning (Structure #1) {#sect-00014}

*Student responsibility is a key factor in both virtual learning and
face-to-face learning*. In both settings, a student must be attentive in
order to understand what is happening in the classroom and what is
expected regarding readings, lab work, and other outside assignments.
Differences occur in virtual classes and face-to-face classes, *though*,
in how students choose to be attentive. *Depending on* how the virtual
classes are set up, students' attention can range from complete to
nonexistent, *and* the instructor might never know how much attention a
particular student is paying. With in-person classes, *on the other
hand*, an instructor can see a student's body language more closely and
determine whether that student is attentive.

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

*Frame for a comparison-and-contrast topic sentence (Structure #2):*

One way (subject 1) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and (subject 2) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
are different is (difference) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_; a way they are alike
is (similarity) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

One way *virtual learning* and *face-to-face learning* are different is
*in the way students choose to be attentive*; a way they are alike is
*that student responsibility is a key element*.

*Structure #2 for comparison-and-contrast paragraph about virtual
learning and face-to-face learning:*

*identification of two subjects followed by a point-by-point discussion*

*point 1*: discussion of a difference between virtual learning and
face-to-face learning

*point 2:* discussion of a similarity of virtual learning and
face-to-face learning

### Model comparison-and-contrast paragraph about virtual learning and face-to-face learning (Structure #2) {#sect-00015}

*One way that virtual learning and face-to-face learning are different
is in the methods students choose to be attentive, *but* they are alike
in that student responsibility is a key factor in both*. *With* virtual
learning, students must clear their study space of distractions and be
sure to have reliable Internet connections. *Alternatively*, in
face-to-face learning, the study area and Internet connections are
already in place and are provided by the school. *However*, in both
styles of classes, students have the responsibility to be attentive in
order to understand what is happening in the classroom and what is
expected as far as readings, lab work, and other outside assignments.

## Problem and Solution {#sect-00016}

*Frame for problem-and-solution topic sentence (Structure #1):*

The issue of (predicament/s or challenging issue/s)
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ was solved/can be solved by
(what was done/what should be done)
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The issue of *juveniles repeatedly committing crimes* can be solved by
*treating juvenile offenders as adults*.

*Structure #1 for problem-and-solution paragraph about trying juveniles
as adults:*

*an explanation of problem(s), followed by the solution*

*problem:* number of juveniles committing serious crimes is rising

*problem:* facilities to which these juveniles are sent have failed to
rehabilitate them

*problem:* youths continue their life of crime

*solution:* juveniles should be tried as adults

### Model problem-and-solution paragraph about trying juveniles as adults (Structure #1) {#sect-00017}

*Across the country, the number of juveniles committing serious crimes
is rising dramatically*. The facilities to which these juveniles are
sent have failed to rehabilitate them, *and* a high percentage of the
youths continue with their life of crime. Law-abiding citizens of the
country, *however*, realize that this situation must change. *By* trying
juveniles as adults, the issue of juveniles repeatedly committing crimes
can be solved.

*Frame for problem-and-solution topic sentence (Structure #2):*

By (what was done/what should be done)
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, the issue of (predicament/s or
challenging issue/s) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ would be
solved/was solved.

By *trying juveniles as adults*, the issue of *juveniles repeatedly
committing crimes* can be solved.

*Structure #2 for problem-and-solution paragraph about trying juveniles
as adults:*

*an explanation of a solution, followed by the problems that
necessitated it*

*solution:* juveniles are tried as adults

*problem:* number of juveniles committing serious crimes is rising

*problem:* facilities to which these juveniles are sent have failed to
rehabilitate them

*problem:* youths continue their life of crime

### Model problem-and-solution paragraph about trying juveniles as adults (Structure #2) {#sect-00018}

*Juveniles should be tried as adults*. Across the country, the number of
juveniles committing serious crimes is rising dramatically. The
facilities to which these juveniles are sent have failed to rehabilitate
them, *though*, and a high percentage of the youths continue with their
life of crime. *Because of this lack of success,* law-abiding citizens
of the country realize that these problems must be addressed
immediately.

## Definition {#sect-00019}

*Frame for definition topic sentence:*

To most people, (subject) is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_; however, it
really is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

To most people, a hero is *a famous person who is admired or idealized*;
however, *a hero is really anyone who goes out of the way to help
others*.

*Structure for definition paragraph:*

*common definition or denotation:* a famous person who is admired or
idealized

*writer's expanded definition or connotation:* anyone who goes out of
the way to help others

*explanation/examples/details:* healthcare professionals

*explanation/examples/details:* grocery and convenience store workers

### Model definition paragraph {#sect-00020}

*To most people, a hero is a famous person who is admired or idealized;
however, it really is anyone who goes out of the way to help others.*
For example, during the pandemic that began in 2020, a number of people
with everyday jobs suddenly became heroes. First, the need for
healthcare went up sharply, and healthcare professionals worked many
overtime hours and risked their lives to diagnose and treat others, with
the hope of saving them. Consequently, these people became heroes. Also,
because most people stayed at home and restaurants were closed, people
purchased more food from grocery stores. Therefore, the people who
delivered the food to grocery stores and the essential workers at the
grocery stores became heroes to those who depended on their services.

<figure id="fig-00004">

</figure>

# Checking Validity {#sect-00021}

After you have completed your paragraphs, check the validity, or
soundness, of their logic. To perform this check, begin by assessing the
logical connection of your topic sentences to your thesis statement.
Because the topic sentences are the major supporting statements for your
thesis, each one should support it. Ask and answer the following
questions of each topic sentence:

Does this topic sentence reflect the reasoning strategy you are using?

Does this topic sentence directly support the thesis statement?

Does the topic sentence make a sensible point?

What is the topic sentence's purpose? Is it to provide

background information;

a reason;

an illustration;

an explanation; or

a response to a counterclaim? (See

Position Argument: Practicing the Art of Rhetoric

for more information about counterclaims.)

If you have trouble answering any of the questions and cannot establish
the sentence's validity, consider revising the topic sentence.

Next, check the validity of your body paragraphs' development. To
perform this check, copy and paste to a new page one topic sentence and
the sentences that develop it. Then, answer these questions on all the
major supporting ideas that you develop for each topic sentence:

Does this body paragraph reflect the reasoning strategy you are using?

Does developing the idea in this body paragraph directly support its
topic sentence?

Does this idea make a sensible point?

What is the purpose of developing this idea? Is it to provide

background information;

a reason for the topic sentence's claim;

an illustration of the topic sentence's point;

an explanation of the sentence's point; or

evidence demonstrating the topic sentence's point?

If you have trouble answering any of the questions and cannot establish
a supporting idea's validity, consider revising or replacing the idea
with one that you can logically develop to prove, illustrate, or explain
the topic idea.

# Further Reading {#sect-00022}

The following titles are well-known examples of writings that use the
reasoning strategies of analogy, cause and effect, classification and
division, comparison and contrast, problem and solution, and definition.

Kennedy, John. "Inaugural Address." *John F. Kennedy Presidential
Library and Museum,* 20 Jan. 1961,
https://www.jfklibrary.org/learn/about-jfk/historic-speeches/inaugural-address.
Accessed 25 Jan. 2021.

King, Martin Luther, Jr. "Letter from a Birmingham Jail \[King, Jr.\]."
*African Studies Center---University of Pennsylvania,* 16 April 1963,
https://www.africa.upenn.edu/Articles_Gen/Letter_Birmingham.html.
Accessed 1 Feb. 2021.

Lincoln, Abraham. "The Gettysburg Address." *Abraham Lincoln Online*, 19
Nov. 1863,
http://www.abrahamlincolnonline.org/lincoln/speeches/gettysburg.htm.
Accessed 1 Feb. 2021.

Yousafzai, Malala. "Nobel Peace Prize Acceptance Speech." *Malala.org*,
10 Dec. 2014,
https://www.malala.org/newsroom/archive/malala-nobel-speech. Accessed 23
Jan. 2021.

# Works Cited {#sect-00023}

Kerlin, Kat. "Wildlife Experience High Price of Oil." *UC Davis,* 2 June
2015, www.ucdavis.edu/news/wildlife-experience-high-price-oil/. Accessed
5 Mar. 2021.

Pennisi, Elizabeth. "\$180 Million DNA 'Barcode' Project Aims to
Discover 2 Million New Species." *Science,* 6 Jun. 2019,
https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2019/06/180-million-dna-barcode-project-aims-discover-2-million-new-species.
Accessed 1 Feb. 2021.

Plato. "Book VII." *The Republic*. E-book, Translated by B. Jowett,
Project Gutenberg, 2016.
https://www.gutenberg.org/files/1497/1497-h/1497-h.htm#link2H_4_0010.

"Poster Design Guide." *Cain Project*, 2003. Rice University,
www.owlnet.rice.edu/\~cainproj/designing. Accessed 25 Jan. 2021.

Royal Shakespeare Company. *Macbeth,*
https://www.rsc.org.uk/shakespeare-learning-zone/macbeth. Accessed 26
Apr. 2021.

Thurman, Susan Sommers, and William L. Gary, Jr. *Critical Literacy:
Integrating Critical Thinking, Reading, and Writing*. Cognella, Inc.,
2019.

"World's First Centre for Rapid DNA Species Identification Opens in
Guelph." *CBC News*, 9 May 2007,
https://www.cbc.ca/news/technology/world-s-first-centre-for-rapid-dna-species-identification-
opens-in-guelph-1.663503. Accessed 1 Feb. 2021.
