m00038

fb6ab45c-4ab7-4d9a-a08b-863d58904383

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Since pen was first put to paper, authors have been recording their
personal experiences in order to perpetuate them, share meaningful
lessons learned, or simply entertain an audience. Indeed, even as far
back as Roman ruler Julius Caesar (100--44 BCE), who wrote accounts of
his epic battles, authors have written to preserve history, seek acclaim
for accomplishments, and pass down wisdom. Writing about your own life
can feel alternately satisfying, terrifying, and exhilarating. It allows
you to share meaningful personal experiences, to reflect on them, and to
connect on a new level with your audience. Personal writing can reveal
more than just events you've experienced---it tells your audience who
you are as you relate personal experiences to convey humor, compassion,
fears, and beliefs.

A personal narrative is a form of nonfiction writing in which the author
recounts an event or incident from their life. A memoir is a type of
nonfiction writing in which the author tells a first-person version of a
time period or an event in their life. Because the two genres, or forms
of writing, share more similarities than differences, they are covered
here together. Personal writing, whether a narrative or a memoir, is an
opportunity to share your lived experiences with readers. A personal
narrative tells a story and often includes memories and anecdotes
(short, amusing, or interesting stories about something that happened in
real life) to relate events and ideas. Like all good writing, personal
narratives have an overarching theme (message you want to impart to your
readers) and a purpose beyond the story itself. Although personal
narratives usually follow the traditional narrative arc of exposition,
rising action, climax, falling action, and resolution, personal writing
has several unique features. Unlike some forms of academic writing,
personal writing welcomes the use of first-person point of view
(narrator participates in events), and narratives and memoirs often have
a narrow focus.

The key to effective personal writing is to know your audience and
purpose. You may write to relay an event, to teach a lesson, or to
explore an idea. You may write to help provide relief from stages of
deep emotion (a process called *catharsis*), to evoke an emotional
response, or simply to entertain readers. Above all, a personal
narrative or memoir tells about an individual\'s experience or a series
of events in a way that emotionally engages readers. The more clearly
and vividly you share your experience, the more likely readers will be
moved.

This chapter presents an excerpt from American writer Mark Twain's *Life
on the Mississippi* (1883), a memoir about his years as a steamboat
pilot on the Mississippi River. Studying this text and Twain's use of
the components of personal narrative will help you understand how
authors create meaningful accounts of personal events. Later in the
chapter, you too will create a personal narrative about an important
event in your life.
