m00039

0485b18d-e4a6-41af-95b8-70f5ec6ec1da

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Read for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and communicating.

Read in several genres to understand how genre conventions shape and are
shaped by readers' and writers' practices and purposes.

Personal writing is unique in that it tells *your* story. Because it is
a form of storytelling, there may be a tendency to discount personal
writing as less academic or less valuable a skill than more formal
writing. Although it may allow for greater freedom in style and content,
personal writing is valuable in its own right because it enables you to
make sense of the world as you---not others---experience it.

Two genres of this type of writing are personal narratives and memoirs.
A genre is a category of writing that features compositions with
distinct characteristics, styles, content, and formats. These two genres
belong to the larger family of creative nonfiction, a term that applies
to the kind of nonfiction writing that shares many traits with fiction
writing. The main difference is that the plots, settings, and characters
come from real life rather than an author's imagination. (For more about
the characteristics of literary nonfiction, see [Print or Textual
Analysis: What You Read](#).) Works of creative nonfiction include
American writers Sebastian Junger's (b. 1962) *The Perfect Storm*
(1997), Jon Krakauer's (b. 1954) *Into Thin Air* (1997), and Terry
Tempest Williams's (b. 1955) *Refuge* (1991). Shorter pieces appear
regularly in popular literary magazines, especially in *The New Yorker*,
*Harper's Magazine*, and *The Atlantic*, as well as in periodicals such
as *Sports Illustrated*, *Rolling Stone*, and *The Wall Street Journal.*

Writers of narrative nonfiction commonly borrow stylistic and formal
techniques from the fast-paced visual narratives of film and television
as well as from the innovative language of poetry, fiction, and drama.
These influences encourage a multifaceted, multidimensional prose style
to keep pace with the multifaceted and multidimensional real world. In
addition to memoirs and personal narratives, biographies,
autobiographies, and literary journalism are considered creative
nonfiction.

# Differences between Memoir and Personal Narrative {#sect-00002}

Both a memoir and a personal narrative are accounts of personal
experiences written in a narrative style, but there are some
differences. A memoir is an account of certain incidents in a person's
life, often from a specific period of time. The narrator is a character
in the story and reflects on past events to draw a conclusion based on
those events. Memoirs focus on how the author remembers a part of their
own life. On the other hand, personal narratives typically center on one
major event through which the narrator reveals thoughts, feelings, and
possibly related experiences. Like other works in the narrative genre,
personal narratives and memoirs develop setting, plot, characterization,
and dialogue.

The word *memoir* comes from the French *mémoire*, meaning "memory."
Personal writing relies on memory but is not necessarily an account of
every detail of the event the author is writing about. If this were the
case, it could make for dry and tedious reading, contrary to what most
authors seek---audience engagement. The more important aim is to create
a composition that is emotionally authentic and conveys the core
sentiment of an event, time period, or lesson and its impact on you, the
writer. In the next section, you will meet an author who does just that.
He reflects on deeply personal events from his own life as they relate
to broader cultural and social issues. The subject of your personal
narrative or memoir should not be just *you*, though you will tell a
story from your life. The overall message of the story should be about
something bigger---a universal understanding, a lesson learned, a common
human experience. The more readers can relate to your story through the
details you include, the more it will mean to them.

# The Cultural Aspect {#sect-00003}

Personal writing provides a unique opportunity to explore cultural
contexts. Culture---shared values, customs, arts, and traits of a social
group---is at the heart of personal narratives and memoirs and should be
part of their central focus. Including historical information,
anecdotes, and vivid details in your writing, as well as using a
specific and relevant English variety, helps you depict the cultures
that are part of your life and enhances readers' understanding. Thus,
readers are likely to experience deeper empathy and emotional responses
in connection to the larger issues presented. You also provide
opportunities for culture to be shared as a common human experience.
