m00040

3ad6ca56-175c-44fd-8e5f-678336fdcd5d

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Read for inquiry, learning, and critical thinking to determine how
authors develop personal narratives and memoirs.

Identify composition techniques for personal writing in various
rhetorical and cultural contexts.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

"I just felt this . . . deep need to express myself. . . . I felt the
deep need to understand."
::::

# The Storyteller's Tools: Context and Voice {#sect-00002}

Ta-Nehisi Coates (b. 1975) is a best-selling author, journalist, and
educator. His writing explores complex issues such as race relations,
urban policing, and racial identity, often focusing on his personal
experiences as a person of color. Coates was born in Baltimore,
Maryland. His mother was a teacher, his father a librarian and founder
of the Black Classic Press, which publishes and republishes significant
works by and about lesser-known people of African descent. Reading the
works of these authors instilled in Coates a lifelong love of reading
and learning and a desire to experience the world outside his
neighborhood.

Coates began his writing vocation at age 17, first exploring the genre
of poetry. He studied journalism at Howard University for five years but
did not graduate. However, he did write and begin earning bylines as a
young writer, publishing articles in popular periodicals such as
*Washington Monthly*, *Mother Jones*, and *Time.* In 2008, he became a
national correspondent for *The Atlantic*, often writing articles and
covering stories about national current events. Among other topics, he
has written about Barack Obama (b. 1961) as the first Black president
and the shooting of Florida teen Trayvon Martin (1995--2012).

True to the genre of personal narrative, Coates focuses his writing not
only on his lived experiences but also on their meaning in the context
of larger cultural and social issues, specifically examining race
relations and racial equity. In 2008, Coates published his first book,
the critically acclaimed memoir *The Beautiful Struggle: A Father, Two
Sons, and an Unlikely Road to Manhood*. In it, he writes about his
childhood, especially his memories of his father. A former member of the
Black Panther Party (founded in 1966), Coates's father raised him and
his six siblings as a family unit in West Baltimore. Coates's father and
the children's four mothers raised the siblings together. Though they
didn't all live together, they were a continuing and active presence in
one another's lives.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

Coates credits his unusual upbringing with providing him both stability
and early access to influential "Afro-centric" literature, which would
influence his life and career. His memoir reflects the steps his father
took to encourage his son's development into adulthood, from reading all
types of books to exploring the neighborhood to helping him grapple with
what it means to be a Black man in America. This lived experience is
central to the personal narrative he creates in *The Beautiful
Struggle.*

Coates's best-known essay, "The Case for Reparations," which proposes
reparations for slavery, was published in *The Atlantic* in June 2014.
Framing his argument around the history of slavery, Coates paints a
picture detailing the connections among slavery, race, and economics,
specifically focusing on the modern Chicago housing crisis and policy.
"The essence of American racism is disrespect," he proposes.

The next year, Coates published the best seller *Between the World and
Me*, a personal narrative written as a letter to his teenage son. In
this book, recounting his own upbringing in Baltimore's violent inner
city during the crack cocaine epidemic, Coates explores the idea that
the structure of American society fosters white supremacy. He reveals
his wish for his son, now "growing into consciousness": "that you feel
no need to constrict yourself to make other people comfortable." In
2019, Coates published his first novel, *The Water Dancer*, a work of
historical fiction about a slave who helps in the Underground Railroad.

In addition to writing, Coates is an educator. From 2012 to 2014, he was
a visiting professor at MIT, and in 2014, he joined the faculty of the
City University of New York as a journalist-in-residence. Coates
compares writing to a refining process: by applying pressure to
yourself, you develop new muscles. He calls writing "an act of physical
courage" that relies on the revision process to translate thought to
page: "I . . . consider the entire process about failure, and I think
that's . . . why more people don't write."

Coates uses doubling in his writing. Because he is both protagonist and
narrator, he sees himself as both subject and object, both character and
storyteller, and at once a participant and an observer in his narration.
Such doubling is often symbolic in memoirs, represented by paired events
or mirroring.

You can watch [Advice on Writing](#) to learn more of Coates's advice to
writers such as yourself. Listen as American correspondent Martha
Teichner (b. 1948), interviews Coates on *[CBS Sunday Morning](#)*,
November 5, 2017.

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00003}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
