m00046

2d3ae4d5-acd5-40cf-bd5c-cd593664c642

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Respond to a variety of situations and contexts by recognizing diction,
tone, formality, design, medium, or structure to meet the situation.

Read a diverse range of texts, attending especially to patterns of
organization, the interplay between verbal and nonverbal elements, and
how these features function for different audiences and situations.

Multilingual writers are those who write in both first and second (or
third . . . or more!) languages, as opposed to monolingual writers, who
write in a single language. In the United States, it is not uncommon
that English is the second language of multilingual authors, many of
whom may have extensive familiarity and literacy in both their first and
second languages. Colleges and universities, too, in their quest to
include a more diverse population within their ranks, have seen an
increase in multilingual writers and students.

Addressing the needs of multilingual students and writers deserves
special attention, as these writers may experience a variety of
differences between writing in their first languages and in English. In
fact, the landscape and functions of various parts of
writing---linguistics, audience, and rhetorical appeals, to name a
few---vary across languages and cultures. While certain expectations
exist in the academic sphere---for example, the way rhetorical appeals
are incorporated within a position argument---different cultural
practices and assumptions may require different processes for those
writing from the perspective of multiple languages or cultures.
Understanding academic literacies can be challenging enough for students
entrenched in the typical American classroom, and space should be carved
out for those coming from different outlooks, particularly multilingual
writers.

Multilingual writers have much to offer to classrooms and readers'
literary experiences. In the past, languages have been viewed as
occupying separate spaces in a multilingual writer's mind. It is
commonly accepted that multilingual authors switch between the
linguistic and cultural norms of each of their languages. But separate
languages are also cohesive, allowing authors to draw on a wide variety
of inventory from a different language as they compose, thus enhancing
their writing.

# The Storyteller's Purpose: The Truth of the Human Experience {#sect-00002}

Consider adding multilingual elements to your writing if you are a
multilingual author. Language can create a mood and atmosphere for your
readers, helping communicate cultural and linguistic individualities.
You might add narration or dialogue in a language other than English to
the story of your personal turning point if it makes sense within the
narrative. For example, you might use dialogue to convey a young woman's
conversation with her Mexican grandmother:

*"Te amo, nieta," she whispered gently.*

This can be a more powerful use of language and culture than simply
stating that the grandmother spoke in Spanish, allowing the reader to
experience the culture through language. Or a character may ask a
question or make a statement in another language, allowing the reader to
understand through the context of surrounding narration or dialogue:

*"Vous avez des livres de Dickens?" the woman inquired. "Yes," I
responded, "we have several books by Dickens."*

Alternatively, consider sharing your own thoughts in another language,
retaining traces of that language's structure and grammar. [Reflection
Trailblazer: Sandra Cisneros](#) does this in Spanish, and Nigerian
author Chimamanda Ngozi-Adichie (b. 1977) does this in Igbo. Both serve
as models of how to incorporate another language into writing. In
addition, some professional authors write in the language of the country
they live in. For example, Irish playwright, poet, and novelist Samuel
Beckett (1906--1989) lived in France and wrote in both French and
English. American author Jhumpa Lahiri (b. 1967), who was born in London
to Indian parents, lived for years in Italy and has written in Italian
as well as her native English.

# Publish Your Work {#sect-00003}

Publishing your personal writing is the next step you may want to take.
In addition to your campus literary magazine, the following journals
accept undergraduate creative work and are often looking for
submissions.

The Allegheny Review

Creative Nonfiction

Inquiries Journal

International Journal of Undergraduate Research & Creative Activities
