m00049

e6272c6d-dbbc-43a0-bba4-d2a4a450fed5

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify characteristics of profile writing.

Explain how the profile genre has developed.

Beginning with its first issue in 1925, *The New Yorker* magazine has
run a regular feature called \"Profiles.\" The earliest of this series
of biographical sketches combined the elements still in use for profiles
today: anecdotes (brief stories), interview data, descriptions of the
subject and their surroundings, and researched information to provide
background and context. In the early 1950s, then senator John F. Kennedy
(1917--1963) had an idea to develop a similar article about U.S.
senators who had shown moral courage in the face of opposition. He asked
one of his speechwriters, Ted Sorensen (1928--2010), to research
examples of senators who had displayed this quality. As he researched,
Sorensen found so much information that he suggested Kennedy write a
book about these individuals.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

The 1956 volume, titled *Profiles in Courage*, spotlights eight senators
who took unpopular stances against majority consensus; subjects range
from John Quincy Adams (1767--1848) to Robert A. Taft (1889--1953). Many
of the profiled senators lost political power as a result of their
actions. The John F. Kennedy Library Foundation later established the
Profile in Courage Award, given to "a public official (or officials) at
the federal, state, or local level whose actions demonstrate the
qualities of politically courageous leadership" ("[About the
Award](#)"). Kennedy's book established a connection between the profile
genre and the idea of courage, and other writers have continued drawing
on this connection.

One such writer is Veronica Chambers, this chapter's trailblazer. In her
book *Resist: 40 Profiles of Ordinary People Who Rose Up against Tyranny
and Injustice*, Chambers includes profiles of individuals who displayed
uncommon and often unpopular courage. Although profile pieces do not
always focus on courageous people as subjects, that particular focus can
provide a strong angle---a viewpoint or lens---for profile writing. Like
Kennedy and Chambers, profile writers often communicate admiration for
some attribute that their subject displays, whether courage or another
quality that might provide an example to others.

Although other types of writing can inspire readers to develop admirable
qualities, profiles do so particularly well. They are generally short
enough to read in one sitting and strongly focus on one main idea for
readers to absorb. They are compelling because they combine elements of
both storytelling and reporting. Profiles of people who embody certain
ideals or principles can provide models for readers to become better at
living up to those principles.
