m00050

f8e48d56-e099-4f14-8570-cf8f419ae217

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Read for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and communicating in
varying rhetorical and cultural contexts.

Determine how genre conventions are shaped by purpose, culture, and
expectation.

Comment on the interplay among author, subject, and audience.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

"There is not a story where the oppressor wins forever."
::::

You may know Veronica Chambers (b. 1970) from having read *Mama's Girl*,
her 1996 memoir about being raised in Brooklyn by her mother, who had
immigrated with her from Panama. You may have seen one of the many books
that Chambers has coauthored, such as *Yes, Chef* with Marcus
Samuelsson, published in 2013; *Make It Messy*, also with Marcus
Samuelsson, published in 2015; or *Thirty two (32) Yolks*, with Eric
Ripert, published in 2016. Building on these successes, Chambers---who
has served as senior editor at several major publications, including
*Glamour*, *Newsweek*, and the *New York Times Magazine*---has recently
focused on developing an array of young adult books highlighting the
voices and histories of marginalized people, mainly Black women.

In the expanded paperback edition of *Resist: 40 Profiles of Ordinary
People Who Rose Up against Tyranny and Injustice*, published in 2020,
Chambers delves into the profile genre, covering a variety of well-known
and influential subjects dating from as early as 1429 to the present
day. While many of her subjects are Black American women, such as civil
rights activist Fannie Lou Hamer (1917--1977) and Georgia politician
Stacey Abrams (b. 1973), the collection includes people from around the
world and from different cultures, among them Indian leader Mohandas
Gandhi (1869--1948), German industrialist Oskar Schindler (1908--1974),
and South African singer Miriam Makeba (1932--2008). In every chapter,
Chambers uses the profile genre to highlight one key aspect of each of
her subjects' lives.

# Paying Attention to the Subject's Voice {#sect-00002}

Profiles aim to help readers better understand their subject by focusing
on one major idea. When the subject is a person, readers can better
understand that person by reading their spoken or written words.
Chambers uses this technique throughout her book. In the first chapter,
Chambers tells the story of French heroine Joan of Arc (c. 1412--1431),
centering on the idea that individuals are born for a purpose. Readers
can better understand Joan of Arc's singlemindedness because of the
chapter's epigraph (quotation provided at the beginning of a written
piece that indicates how readers should approach the text), attributed
to the subject: "I am not afraid.... I was born to do this" (Chambers,
*Resist* 9). The profile itself offers an additional direct quote: "All
battles are first won or lost in the mind"(10). Other chapters, such as
those profiling Italian astronomer Galileo Galilei (1564--1642) and
former South African president Nelson Mandela (1918--2013), also begin
with the subject's words in an epigraph or employ both
strategies---epigraph plus direct quotes within the profile. (You may
choose to use either or both of these strategies in your profile as
well.)

# Recognizing the Author's Voice {#sect-00003}

Profile writers may choose to include themselves in the piece, referring
to their own experiences and interactions with the subject. In this
collection, Chambers instead speaks in her own voice in the "resist
lesson" at the end of each chapter. These "resist lessons" distill each
profile's focus into a short phrase, such as "We must speak for the
voiceless" (the lesson for the profile of Mexican revolutionary Emiliano
Zapata, 1879--1919) and "Honor the hands that harvest your crops" (the
lesson for the combined profile of American labor leaders Dolores Huerta
(b. 1930) and Cesar Chavez, 1927--1993).

# Negotiating among Author's Voice, Subject's Voice, and Genre Expectations {#sect-00004}

The profile genre enjoys considerable variety. While Chambers does not
include her own experiences in this collection, other writers do insert
themselves into the profiles they write. Yet even without first-person
commentary, Chambers clearly communicates her opinions of the subjects
with her word choices and "resist lessons." Either choice---including
the author directly in the text or not---can be appropriate, depending
on the rhetorical situation.

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00005}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
