m00054

b2d96297-4a0a-484f-8c29-619d9d8dd4a3

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Apply various editing strategies to a draft in progress.

Implement consistent use of verbs in a draft in progress.

When you edit, you make changes at the sentence level: phrasing,
grammar, mechanics, and wording. Read your paper aloud to check for
needed editing. Alternately, you could have your device read the paper
to you if it has that feature. As you read or listen, if you notice that
something does not sound quite right, your draft probably needs editing
at that point. Additionally, if your electronic draft shows blue
underlining, check whether you should accept the changes suggested by
your software. Once you have thoroughly reviewed each sentence in your
draft, read aloud or listen to the entire piece again to see how it
flows, making any additional needed changes as you go along.

# English Varieties and Verbs {#sect-00002}

This section focuses on English verb tense consistency when editing.
Every English speaker converses in one or more forms of the language. In
the past, people have referred to these forms as *dialects*. Today,
linguists more commonly call them *English varieties*. Every English
variety uses verbs, as do most languages. Verbs are the words that
express the action in a sentence. Their most distinguishing feature is
that they change according to tense---that is, they take on different
forms to express action that happened in the past, happens in the
present, or will happen in the future.

As you edit your profile, you will need to match the English variety you
use to the expectations of your audience. If your instructor is your
only reader, you will probably need to use an English variety
appropriate for an academic setting. If the instructor has asked you to
write a profile to appeal to another audience, think about how the
English variety you choose might connect better with that audience.

In every English variety, the form of the verb changes to indicate
whether something is happening currently or has happened already. These
changes that indicate time differences are called verb tenses. If an
action or description occurs now or occurs regularly, in the present
time, writers use the present tense. Conversely, if the action occurred
in the past and no longer occurs, writers use the past tense.

Present tense:

She walks to class.

Past tense:

She walked to class yesterday.

In simple sentences such as these, choosing a verb tense is fairly
straightforward. The author decides when to place the event in time and
chooses the corresponding verb form. Although people easily use
different verb tenses every day, getting them right in writing can be
tricky at times. Writers may accidentally change from past to present
tense within a text---or even within the same sentence---for no
particular reason. Consider these examples:

Sentence 1:

I lost a glove on my walk, but I

find

it later.

Sentence 2:

I lost a glove on my walk, but I

found

it later.

In Sentence 1, the verb *lost* places the action in the past; the
present-tense verb *find* is not consistent with that pattern. The
revision in Sentence 2 places all of the action in the same time frame:
the past. Because changing the tense for no reason can confuse the
audience, be sure to use the same verb tense throughout, whether events
happen in the past or they happen in the present.

However, you *do* need to change tenses to indicate a difference in
time, and such differences occur often. This situation is why choosing
verb tenses in writing can sometimes pose challenges for writers. If you
are using the present tense in writing but you want to tell about
something that happened in the past, you need to change tenses to make
that time difference clear. Look at these sentences:

Sentence 1:

The artist

uses

bright colors in her paintings. She

says

that when she

is

a child, these colors

attract

her.

Sentence 2:

The artist

uses

bright colors in her paintings. She

says

that when she

was

a child, these colors

attracted

her.

The writer is discussing the artist in the present tense, and the artist
is speaking in the present tense. However, she is telling about her
childhood, which took place in the past. Therefore, she and the writer
use both past and present tense to make the time distinction clear. To
put all events in the present tense would not make sense in such cases.
Look at the verb tense consistency revisions Houston Byrd made to his
essay in [Focusing on the Angle of Your Subject](#). When he tells about
his trip to the store, describes it, and refers to his interview with
the owner, he generally uses---or has revised to use---the past tense,
whereas most of the essay is written in the present tense.

## Proofreading {#sect-00003}

Another type of editing is proofreading. When you proofread, you check
for small details, such as typing mistakes, that need fixing. If your
instructor has asked you to follow a given style guide, such as MLA or
APA, make sure your draft is formatted according to those guidelines. If
any words are underlined in red on your electronic document (indicating
a misspelling), address those issues as you complete your draft. Lastly,
read each sentence individually, starting at the bottom of the draft, to
make sure your spelling and punctuation meet the requirements for the
genre and audience.

You may feel that you are not yet a strong enough writer to edit or
proofread on your own. If so, take advantage of your instructor's office
hours or your college's writing center for support in developing your
work.

# Practice with Verb Tense Consistency {#sect-00004}

Depending on your writing context, you may be asked to write mainly in
either the past or the present tense. For example, MLA style asks
writers to refer to textual materials in the present tense, even though
they have already been written.

With a peer partner, practice choosing the most effective verb forms in
the following sentences. Complete the exercise twice---once for a text
written mainly in the present tense, and once again for a text written
mainly in past tense. Because events happen at different times, you may
have a combination of tenses.

Carla D. Hayden (writes, wrote) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ about John Lewis's
courageous stance against injustice when he (led, leads) the Selma
protests.

People throughout the country (admire, admired) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ John
Lewis and (mourn, mourned) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ his death.

In 1995, Hayden (receives, received) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ the Librarian of
the Year Award, and in 2016, she (is, was) \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ listed by

Fortune

magazine as one of the world's 50 greatest leaders.

To check your draft for verb tense issues, read your profile aloud to a
peer partner. If you notice that some verbs are in the past tense and
some are in the present, make them all one consistent tense throughout
the text---*unless* they indicate a change in time, which they often do.
Making your verb tenses consistent will help clarify your ideas for
readers.
