m00057

125fab5b-a7a3-49cb-a7a3-ac31ab96eae9

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Reflect on the development of composing processes.

Reflect on how those processes affect your final product.

As you develop a writing portfolio over the course of the semester, you
will also reflect on your experience and writing process for each
project. This section guides you in reflecting on your experience as you
developed your profile.

# Reflective Task {#sect-00002}

Take a few moments to jot down notes---by hand or electronically---in
response to the following questions:

What have you learned about yourself in researching and drafting this
profile?

What did you learn in your research that surprised you?

What challenges did you face in gathering your primary research from
interviews and field observations?

What challenges did you face in gathering your secondary research from
academic and other credible sources?

Do you now think differently about the trait you focused on in your
profile? If so, how has your understanding changed? If your thinking
about that trait has not changed, how was it reinforced in this project?

If you were to begin this project again, how would you approach it
differently?

With whom would you like to share your finished project? Why?

What other audiences might be interested in this piece?

After reflecting on your writing process and experience, organize your
thoughts thematically. For example, if some parts of the process were
more challenging for you and other parts were less so, you could
organize your reflection around those two ideas. Or you could separate
your reflection into sections according to the parts of the writing
process that were familiar and the parts that were new to you in this
project.

Once you have organized your notes into sections focusing on coherent
themes, draft a professional email to your instructor to report the
insights you have gained from your reflection. Find out from your
instructor whether you should actually send the reflection via email or
if you should attach it to your final profile document instead.

# Further Reading {#sect-00003}

With their signature blend of narrative and reporting, profiles can be
found in all sorts of media, including blogs, magazines, and podcasts.
Once you start looking for profiles, you will find them everywhere. Here
are several places to find profile writing:

Esquire

.

This magazine routinely runs profile features.

Humans of New York

.

Originally a photography project, this blog presents photographs of,
interviews with, and short stories about people who live in New York.
Although the pieces are not all profiles, many of them meet the criteria
for this genre.

The New Yorker

.

This magazine still runs profiles in each issue.

This American Life

.

This weekly public radio program focuses on storytelling about
compelling people.

# Works Cited {#sect-00004}

"About the Award." *John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum*,
National Archives,
www.jfklibrary.org/events-and-awards/profile-in-courage-award/about-the-award.

Chambers, Veronica. "Rebel Commentary: Veronica Chambers on the Power of
Individual Resistance." Interview by Rebecca Carroll. *Gothamist*, New
York Public Radio, 19 Sept. 2018,
gothamist.com/arts-entertainment/rebel-commentary-veronica-chambers-on-the-power-of-individual-resistance.

Chambers, Veronica. *Resist: 40 Profiles of Ordinary People Who Rose Up
against Tyranny and Injustice*. Harper, 2020.

Glass, Ira. *This American Life*. WBEZ Chicago,
www.thisamericanlife.org/.

Hartsell, Mark. "Journalism, behind Barbed Wire." *Library of Congress
Blog*, Library of Congress, 5 May 2017,
blogs.loc.gov/loc/2017/05/journalism-behind-barbed-wire/

Hayden, Carla D. "Remembering John Lewis: The Power of 'Good Trouble.'"
*Library of Congress Blog*, Library of Congress, 19 July 2020,
blogs.loc.gov/loc/2020/07/remembering-john-lewis-the-power-of-good-trouble/.

Kennedy, John F. *Profiles in Courage*. Harper, 1956.

Stanton, Brandon. *Humans of New York*. www.humansofnewyork.com/.

Talese, Gay. "Frank Sinatra Has a Cold." *Esquire*, Hearst Magazine
Media, 1 Apr. 1966,
classic.esquire.com/article/1966/4/1/frank-sinatra-has-a-cold.
