m00058

f36cb8f7-1638-49ce-b908-84dc042b1468

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

You are likely familiar with the term proposal*---*people propose toasts
to celebrate occasions and make marriage proposals. Businesses create
proposals to describe the services they will provide and at what
cost---from electricians, plumbers, and decorators to advertising firms,
website designers, and caterers. Sometimes the proposals are for a
specific project; sometimes they are general. In these types of
real-world proposals, the problem being solved is straightforward, but
often it is not stated directly: for example, someone needs an extra
bathroom built in their house, a revision to their website, or food for
a gathering, and the person needing a service will contact a provider.

The purpose of the kind of proposal you will write in this chapter is to
propose, or suggest, a solution to a problem, usually one whose solution
is not straightforward. Proposals of this type call on writers to
explain the problem so that readers understand it is real and needs a
solution. Because these problems are often complex, they usually have
more than one solution, and sometimes the writer will recommend several
possible solutions. For example, imagine you are studying food science.
You likely pay more attention to food than most people do, and perhaps
you've noticed a lot of food being thrown away in a cafeteria on your
campus. You believe it is important to reduce food waste. Solving this
problem of wasted food will require investigation and research into what
food is being thrown away; why students, faculty members, and employees
are throwing it away; possible ways to reduce the amount of wasted food;
and a recommendation to the people who can put your proposal---that is,
your proposed solution--- into action. This is one example of the kind
of problem you might write about in this chapter.
