m00060

18f4187b-b186-494f-b42a-ea78e1550079

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe a particular problem and a proposed solution.

Discuss the process of identifying a problem and proposing a solution.

Articulate how proposals to solve problems reach their intended
audience.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

"What do you do when expertise is not enough?"
::::

# Medical Problem Solver {#sect-00002}

Born in New York City, surgeon and author Atul Gawande (b. 1965)
graduated from Stanford University in 1987 with a degree in biology and
political science. A Rhodes Scholarship enabled him to study at the
University of Oxford, where he earned a master's degree in philosophy,
politics, and economics. Returning to the United States from England,
Gawande entered politics and worked for Al Gore*'s* (b. 1948)
presidential campaign and later served as a health care adviser during
the Clinton administration (1993--2001). Gawande graduated from Harvard
Medical School with an MD in 1995 and an MPH (master of public health)
in 1999. Among his main concerns and frequent topics of his written work
have been patient care and medical ethics.

In the mid-2000s, Dr. Gawande came across a simple idea for improving
medical care. Another physician, Peter Pronovost (b. 1965), a critical
care specialist, had identified a solution to the problem of patients in
intensive care units (ICUs) developing infections after having central
intravenous lines inserted. The cause of the problem was human error.
Doctors knew the steps they needed to follow to prevent infection when
they inserted a central line, but some of them skipped at least one of
the steps. When they did, the risk of a dangerous infection increased,
which in turn increased the likelihood of a poor outcome for the
patient---longer illness, additional surgery, or death.

Borrowing a method from airplane pilots, who must go through a checklist
before being cleared for takeoff, Dr. Pronovost proposed a similar
solution for ICU doctors: a checklist of five things they needed to do
when inserting a central intravenous line. Dr. Pronovost ran an
experiment in the ICU at the hospital where he worked. Doctors were
instructed to follow the steps on the checklist, and nurses who assisted
during the procedure were told to observe and speak up if a doctor
skipped a step.

The checklist worked. The infection rate dropped dramatically, reducing
ICU stays, saving lives, and saving money. Dr. Pronovost began writing
checklists for other ICU situations. These checklists were successful as
well in addressing particular problems.

Approached by the World Health Organization, Dr. Gawande worked with a
team around the world to develop a checklist to improve the safety of
surgery. As a surgeon, he was well aware of complications that could
occur as a result of mistakes before, during, and after surgery. The
team created a 19-point "safe surgery" checklist that was tested at
eight hospitals around the world, including one in the United States.
The checklist worked again---all eight hospitals saw the rate of
significant postsurgical complications and deaths drop by an average of
more than 35 percent, with no additional costs.

The problem the two doctors identified is both simple and complex. The
problem is not that doctors lack knowledge; the problem is that because
the situations they encounter are often complicated and urgent, doctors
do not always correctly apply what they know.

The solution proposed by Dr. Gawande and Dr. Pronovost is similarly both
simple and complex: to improve accuracy, use a checklist. However, other
doctors needed to be convinced that a simple change like this would
improve medical care. To persuade others, Gawande and Pronovost wrote
articles for medical journals in which they presented the problem they
studied, the methods they used, the results of their experiments, and
the solution they recommended. Dr. Gawande then went on to apply the
checklist solution to preventable problems in fields outside of medicine
in his book *The Checklist Manifesto: How to Get Things Right* (2009),
which became a best seller.

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00003}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
