m00064

008e5069-1d14-4234-8a94-151a5b776f6a

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Identify subjects and verbs in sentences.

Distinguish between subjects and verbs that agree and those that do not.

Readers of formal documents such as proposals expect writers to be aware
of the conventions of grammar and punctuation. One such convention is
subject-verb agreement.

The subject of a sentence names something. The predicate contains the
verb, which expresses an action, an occurrence, or a state of being. The
subject and verb in a sentence must agree. In standard English,
"agreement" means that a singular subject must have a singular verb
(*The *bus* *leaves* in five minutes*) and a plural subject must have a
plural verb (*The *buses* *leave* in five minutes*). However, some
English dialects omit the *-s* ending for singular verbs or use a
singular verb with a plural subject: *The *man* *ask* for help. Property
*taxes* *was raised* last year.*

Subject-verb agreement gets tricky in several sentence constructions,
which are described below. To check for subject-verb agreement in your
writing, proofread your final draft by finding each subject and verb.
Then use the following questions to test whether the subject and verb
agree. For more on subject-verb agreement, see [Verbs](#).

Is the subject compound? Two or more subjects joined by *and* take a
plural verb in most sentences:

*Basketball and wrestling* *are* my favorite sports.

However, when the parts of the subject form a single idea or unit, the
verb is singular:

*Red beans and rice* *is* my favorite meal.

*Ten dollars* *is* enough money for lunch.

When compound subjects are joined by *or* or *nor,* the verb should
agree with the word closest to it:

Either your uncles or your *mother* *remembers* your grandmother's gumbo
recipe.

Either your mother or your *uncles* *remember* your grandmother's gumbo
recipe.

Do other words come between the subject and verb? The verb must agree
with the subject even when words and phrases come between them:

The *price* of these shoes at all stores *is* unbelievable.

A *suitcase* containing sweaters, coats, and jackets *was* found in the
street.

Does the verb come before the subject? The subject and verb must agree
even when the verb comes before the subject:

*Are* *Daniela and Juliana* waiting at the restaurant?

There *were* three *dogs* in the yard, all barking at the same time.

In my pocket *are* a *wallet and two pens*.

**Is the subject an indefinite pronoun, such as* everyone*?** Indefinite
[pronouns](#) do not refer to specific people or things. Most indefinite
pronouns take a singular verb, but not all.

The indefinite pronouns that take a singular verb include *anybody,
anyone, anything, each, either, everybody, everyone, everything,
neither, nobody, no one, nothing, one, somebody, someone,* and
*something*.

*Everyone* on the team *practices* all season.

*Neither* of the wide receivers *feels* ready for the season to end.

These indefinite pronouns take a plural verb: *both, few, many, others,*
and *several.*

*Several* of the athletes on the team *come* from the same high school.

*Both* wide receivers *have* excellent stats.

A few indefinite pronouns take a singular or plural verb depending on
whether the word they refer to is singular or plural. These include
*all, any, enough, more, most, none,* and *some.* With these pronouns,
use a singular or plural verb that fits the context of your sentence.

*All* of these students *take* at least one class in science or math.
(plural)

*Most* of his work *is* original. (singular)

Is the subject a collective noun? Collective nouns, such as *audience,
band, class, crowd, family, group,* or *team,* can take a singular or a
plural verb depending on the context. When group members act
individually, use a plural verb. Writers often add the word *members*
for clarity. When the group acts as a single unit, which is the most
common construction, use a singular verb:

The *band* *rehearses* every Thursday.

The union (members) still disagree on the contract terms.

# Practice Subject-Verb Agreement {#sect-00002}

Select the correct verb to complete each sentence.

Under the table \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ his slippers and socks. (is, are)

The choir usually \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ in the auditorium. (meets, meet)

Some of the actors \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ two roles. (performs, perform)

Some of this song \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ familiar. (sounds, sound)

Either my brother or my sisters \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ the keys to the truck.
(has, have)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Whitney and her friend need a ride to the station?
(does, do)

The situation concerning the reports and their authors \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
under investigation. (is, are)

Fifteen dollars and 40 cents \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ the amount of change she
received. (is, are)
