m00066

6dbf0ece-836e-4f6e-ae89-e4c93b722d53

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Describe technical writing as a career path.

Explore the field of technical writing in greater depth.

If you like science and technical fields and you like to write, you may
want to explore technical writing as a career path. Technical writers
usually have a degree in English, journalism, or communication. Often,
they also have knowledge, college coursework, or a degree in a
specialized field such as computer science, engineering, medicine,
biology, agriculture, and other technical fields, such as manufacturing,
construction, welding, and plumbing; however, companies will usually
train technical writers on the subject needed and the style in which the
writers they employ need to write.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Although the work varies depending on the industry, organization, and
specific position, technical writers typically perform the following
tasks:

Create content.

Technical writers create an array of documents, such as product
information, operating and assembly instructions, "how-to" and "owner's"
manuals, technical documentation, business proposals (solicited and
unsolicited), lists of frequently asked questions (FAQs), grant
proposals, and journal articles. (For more on how to write a business
proposal, which contains specific sections that often are not included
in an academic proposal paper, see the OpenStax

Business Communications

text.)

Research.

Technical writers conduct research to gather the information they need
to write accurate, professional, and helpful content.

Edit.

Technical writers edit and standardize content prepared by other writers
in their organization.

Adapt content for multiple platforms.

Technical writers create paper-based and digital content, using text,
graphics, images, sound, and video to be distributed across different
platforms, including an organization's website and social media.

In addition, technical writers develop and use the following skills:

Writing.

Technical writers spend extended periods of time in front of a computer
writing complicated information in clear and concise language.

Audience awareness.

Technical writers are highly aware of the audience for their writing.
They plan, organize, and distribute the content they create with their
readers, viewers, and users in mind.

Communication and collaboration.

Technical writers typically work on teams and collaborate with technical
experts, coworkers, and clients.

Problem-solving.

Technical writers often need to figure out how something works in order
to write documents their audience can understand.

Time management.

Technical writers often work on multiple projects with tight deadlines.
Setting priorities to keep projects on track is a key skill.

To learn more about technical writing as a career, including average
pay, employment outlook, and more, see the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics *[Occupational Outlook Handbook](#).* You can also read job
descriptions and search for internship opportunities at job sites such
as Indeed, Monster, or Snagajob.
