m00010

810e10c5-2e6b-47c1-aa36-a2645f3af52e

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

Your past experiences with computers, cell phones, and other electronic
devices represent your conscious choice to connect with a global
community. For example, you may post on social media sites where you
receive instant feedback from around the world in the form of reposts or
likes. Through these interactions, you are empowered to influence people
more than at any other point in history. In fact, you may be on the road
to becoming the next big social media influencer---a person with
established credentials in a certain field with access to a large
audience and who, because of popularity, can influence others' actions.
With applications that instantly translate into many languages, even
language has become less of a barrier to your potential audience and
thus to your potential influence. However, even though the world may be
more connected now than ever before and communication may be faster,
easier, more powerful, and more widely accessible, the basics of
communication have not changed.

The essential element of all communication, past and present, including
your social media posts and related comments, is the rhetorical
situation: the conditions, or circumstances, of the communication and
the agents, or people involved, in that communication. Notice that the
term comes from the word *rhetoric.* Originally, *rhetoric* referred to
the art of persuasive speaking or writing. Now it is used more
inclusively to mean the "techniques and theories of communication." And
notice, too, that like the people in [\#](#), you are already using
rhetoric every day as you find yourself in different rhetorical
situations on social media. In this chapter, you will learn more about
the use of rhetoric within rhetorical situations as you begin the
journey of constructing bridges among the communication taking place on
social media, in the world of academia, and in the world at large.
