m00012

7adbd687-e755-4d66-8dd7-7c0f0daf7cea

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Read for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and communicating in
various rhetorical contexts.

Identify the elements of successful social media use.

:::: {#note-00001 .note}
::: title
:::

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

"Our actions and words have an impact on others---whether on social
media or in real life."
::::

# Authenticity as Rhetoric {#sect-00002}

By any standard, singer, actor, and philanthropist Selena Gomez (b.
1992) is an influencer. By 2021, Gomez had amassed around 65 million
[Twitter](#) followers and over 260 million [Instagram](#) followers,
placing her among celebrities with top follower counts. Gomez was born
in Grand Prairie, Texas, but raised outside of Dallas. She is named
after the popular Tejano singer Selena Quintanilla-Perez (1971--1995),
who was murdered by her fan club president but still maintains an avid
following. Gomez entered show business as a child, inspired by the
single mother, an amateur actress, who raised her. After roles on
*[Barney and Friends](#)* (from 2002--2004) and *Spy Kids 3-D: Game
Over* (2003), Gomez auditioned for the world of Disney. Appearing first
on *The Suite Life of Zack and Cody* (2005--2008), Gomez landed a lead
role as Alex Russo on Disney's *Wizards of Waverly Place* (2007--2012),
for which she also sang the [theme song](#). By 2012, Gomez was ready to
depart from such family-friendly roles, taking parts in films such as
*Spring Breakers* (2012), *The Dead Don't Die* (2019), and *A Rainy Day
in New York* (2019). Gomez's music career paralleled that of her acting
career; she began as a member of the band Selena Gomez and the Scene
(2009) and launched her solo career in 2012. Gomez has released the solo
albums *Stars Dance* (2013), *Revival* (2015), and *[Rare](#)* (2020).

Despite Gomez's success as a public figure, her relationship with social
media has been rocky. Gomez describes her social media strategy as
"intentional . . . I don't take a lot of pointless pictures." Gomez
recognizes the power of her social media platform, and she has used it
to champion the causes that she cares about. As a person diagnosed with
both lupus (2015) and bipolar disorder (2018), Gomez has used social
media to advocate for mental and physical health causes. (Lupus is an
inflammatory disease caused by the immune system attacking its own
tissue; bipolar disorder is characterized by extreme mood swings.) Gomez
says, "Everything that I'm attached to has a charity aspect." She
continues, "If something good isn't coming out of it, I'm not going to
do it." This "intentional," open approach to her personal difficulties
and her emphasis on building positivity out of struggle generates an
intimacy with fans that has served to increase her following.

However, the most radical action that Gomez may have committed with
regard to social media was her decision to quit it. Suffering from
publicity overload, cyberbullying, and a negatively changing sense of
self, Gomez handed over her Instagram account to her assistant in 2017.
She has also handed her Instagram account over to people such as Georgia
voting rights advocate [Stacey Abrams](#) (b. 1973) as part of the
[#ShareTheMicNow](#) campaign, which amplifies the voices of Black
women. Gomez deleted social media apps from her smartphone and gave up
knowledge of her passwords. She claims that the move has been
liberating: "I suddenly had to learn how to be with myself." She
reflects that there were 150 million people on her phone, and "I just
put it down. . . . That was such a relief."

Despite the shift in approach, Gomez's relationship with social media
remains strong. She actively cultivates a "deliberate . . .
vulnerability" through her unwillingness to shy away from tough or
important issues. Regardless of which of Gomez's assistants hits the
"post" button, Gomez's focus on giving of herself to improve society
resonates with her fans.

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00003}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
