m00014

d15a3db0-6cf5-4936-badc-46b36b790a15

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Determine how conventions are shaped by purpose, language, culture, and
expectations.

Read for inquiry, learning, critical thinking, and communicating in
varying rhetorical and cultural contexts.

Distinguish relationships between genre conventions, ideas, patterns of
organization, and interplay between various elements and how they
influence the rhetorical situation.

# Introduction {#sect-00004}

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

In the social media thread that follows, Proud Immigrant Citizen
\@primmcit posts about immigration and voter suppression. Others add
their comments regarding voter suppression. Consider the ways in which
each person responds to this initial post.

# Social Media Thread {#sect-00002}

Proud Immigrant Citizen \@primmcit

POTUS and DOJ have created a section dedicated to denaturalization.
Strips citizenship and disenfranchises immigrant citizens, mainly
persons of color, on trumped-up charges. Not-so-subtle way to control
who can and cannot vote! This is a nightmare!

*This opening post sets up a rhetorical situation. The genre is social
media in which the platform limits the number of characters. The
author's purpose is to inform others about a policy. It may also be to
collect "likes" or reposts to spread the information, regardless of its
accuracy. The audience is a collection of social media users---some
known, some unknown. The author's stance is against the denaturalization
policy. The context is a POTUS/DOJ action against immigrants. The
culture shows a conflict between immigrants and the current
administration (and its supporters).*

History Buff \@historyfuture

This is not new. Immigration Act of 1924 limited number of new
immigrants to 2% of current U.S. citizens of that nationality. Largest
groups (e.g., White people from northwest Europe) kept getting bigger.
Effective way to concentrate political power.

*This response provides further information about the rhetorical
situation by offering historical context, which, again, may or may not
be accurate.*

Proud Immigrant Citizen \@primmcit

It may not be new, but it's still wrong!

*The original poster reiterates their stance.*

American and Proud \@IPledge

Are you for real saying that the government shouldn't control
immigration? I don't want all these criminals voting, and I've had it up
to here with everyone's stupid complaining!

*This response provides an inaccurate summary of the original post. The
tone shows anger and unwillingness to engage in meaningful discussion or
to learn more about the issue. This person's mind is made up, so it
would be hard to convince them to take a new or refined position.*

Peter \@BetweenTheLines

No, Proud Immigrant is saying that denaturalization is being used as a
means of voter suppression.

*This response corrects the previous responder with an accurate
paraphrase of the original poster's stance and hints at the factual
nature of the original post.*

Karen \@ConservativeGirl

What are the trumped-up charges? Can you direct me to some evidence?
Sounds like a lot of liberal garbage.

*This responder, although clearly against the original poster's stance,
properly asks for evidence---something that may be provided through a
link to keep the character count within the confines of the genre. Based
on the handle and the end of the post, this person may or may not be
open to a new perspective or factual information about the issue.*

Miguel \@BothSides

Liberal or conservative, voter suppression is one of the most dangerous
threats to our democracy.

*This responder offers an evaluation, regardless of stance. The tone
indicates a reasonable attitude. However, by stating "liberal or
conservative," this post may limit the audience since other cultures,
such as moderate or progressive, may be following the thread.*

Sarah \@IWatch

When the news talks about low voter turnout in an election, it's hard to
know why people didn't show up.

*This responder begins an analysis of the original post by providing a
questioning tone. However, this post does not seem to further the
discussion; it makes a statement and does not follow up with new
information or ideas.*

Mario \@MyVote

Exactly, did they stay home by choice, or were they "encouraged" to stay
home by government red tape?

*This responder clarifies the analytical question and tries to reengage
previous responders. The question also opens up the potential for new
evidence from others.*

Maria \@HomeGirl

It's not just immigrants. After Obama was elected, more than 20 states
passed measures to limit voting in Black and Brown neighborhoods.

*This responder offers possible evidence to support the ongoing problem
of voter suppression. While unverified, it provides a strong starting
point for further inquiry and discussion so that evidence can be brought
into the discussion.*

Malik \@BlackPanther

This kind of racism isn't new. History Buff \@historyfuture is right.
Closing polling locations in Black and Brown neighborhoods is the new
poll tax or literacy test.

*This responder makes a connection between the past and present---an
element of analysis.*

Cho \@HistoryRepeats

Yes, the party seeking power wants their voters to turn out, not all
voters.

*This responder makes an inference based on the accumulation of
evidence. While the conclusion may be sound, it remains unclear.*

Megan \@FightThePower

It's easier to suppress the votes of non-supporters than to try to win
them over.

*This responder makes another inference based on the accumulation of
evidence and alludes to previous instances of voter suppression along
with potential rationale.*

Marco \@DontMessWithMe

That's why we need to #StayInLine

*This responder presents a potential call to action---something people
can do to fight voter suppression. This call to action assumes the
audience within the given culture understands or can find out what
#StayInLine means and how to become involved.*

# Conclusion {#sect-00005}

You are likely familiar with this type of social media thread---users
from different cultures and with differing views coming together to
comment on a post. What you may not have realized is that these users
and others like them are engaging in rhetoric by responding to a text
through summary, paraphrase, analysis, evaluation, calls for evidence,
or proposals of action. Again, they demonstrate an understanding of the
rhetorical situation and how to navigate within it.

# Discussion Questions {#sect-00003}

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)

[\#](#)
