m00015

341bd304-7a2a-45dc-b8f6-c6b8fe9bde44

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Develop and implement flexible strategies for reading and rereading.

Articulate how organizational features function for different audiences,
creating cultural awareness within rhetorical situations.

Determine how genre conventions for structure, paragraphs, tone, and
mechanics vary.

Identify common formats and design features for different kinds of text.

Read and write critically within social media platforms.

Thinking critically is crucial to success both in and after school.
Indeed, this skill may be the foundation of all education. Most of
*Writing Guide with Handbook* explores strategies for helping you become
an accomplished critical writer, but as you have already learned, a
close relationship exists between critical writing and critical reading.
Reading and writing, like producing and consuming, are two sides of the
same coin. When you study one, you inevitably learn more about the other
at the same time. The more you attend to the language of published
writers, the more you will learn about your own language. The more you
attend to your own written language, the more you will learn about the
texts you read.

# Summary of Assignment: Critical Response {#sect-00002}

Select a short "text" for response. The "text" may be written, visual,
or a combination of both. Keeping in mind the example of Selena Gomez or
other social media activists (such as Swedish environmentalist Greta
Thunberg \[b. 2003\] or conservative speaker and entrepreneur Wayne
Dupree \[b. 1968\]), focus on a text, perhaps a meme or social media
post, that addresses an aspect of social activism. First, read it
completely for understanding. Summarize or paraphrase the main ideas of
the text to check for comprehension. Second, read it critically to
determine its purpose, to analyze its use of language (or another
element), and to evaluate it. Finally, write a short (1--2 pages)
critical response to the text, perhaps recommending or not recommending
it to other readers, explaining its significance in a particular area of
life or field of study, or even commenting on the diction or style of
the communication and its potential impact on readers.

Another Lens. When you consider another perspective, you often learn
information you have not considered before. Look at [\#](#):

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

If you have the perspective of the X, all you see is the "back" of the
L. You might not even know it's an L. You might think it is an I, but it
also could be the side of an M, or an N, or even a P. From the
perspective of X, you have only limited information about the structure,
letter, or whatever is in front of you. If you take the perspective of
Y, you have a different information, which contrasts with what you
learned from X. Furthermore, neither X nor Y has the perspective of Z.
As you can see, combining the perspectives gives you a more
comprehensive picture. Although it is unlikely you will ever get a
complete and accurate picture of any given situation, by considering
other perspectives, you begin to think critically to understand an
issue, problem, or condition.

As a class or in small groups, agree on a short text to read and respond
to, as described. Share your responses in small groups, paying
particular attention to the evaluation, analysis, and evidence that each
person presents. Revise your initial response based on these new, shared
perspectives from your classmates about the same text. The goal is to
learn from others' perspectives. In so doing, consider how your
classmates' perspectives enhance your comprehension and broaden your
ability to understand the interpretations of the text. As you revise,
incorporate this new knowledge, and consider how the various cultures
and interpretations based on culture can lead to understanding and even
misunderstanding. Finally, pay attention to how you might consider these
multiple perspectives to clarify the text's purpose or meaning for an
audience.

# Mapping the Rhetorical Situation {#sect-00003}

When you first sit down to write, you can use any of several methods to
get going. The blank page can be intimidating, and facing a blank page
is one of the reasons writing can be challenging at first. Figure out
which "launch" methods work best for you and your style(s) of thinking
and writing. Sometimes this stage is called prewriting or planning.
Taking the time to prewrite helps you decide how to proceed to the
actual writing and builds your confidence in the process. Some people
make concept maps, others make checklists, and still others create
formal outlines. Some do research on a topic before they start, whereas
others just sit down and write whatever comes to mind, a process called
freewrite. There is no perfect or correct way to begin writing. The
important thing is to discover which strategies work for you for a
particular writing task, and then to use them.

For this writing task, create a concept map with six radiating circles
(or use six index cards that you can physically move around on a
tabletop). Label the map as noted in [\#](#). In each radiating circle,
fill in the information regarding the rhetorical situation (that is, the
agents and the five conditions: genre, purpose, stance, context, and
culture) in relation to your chosen text. As you assess the rhetorical
situation, you will further your understanding of the text, and you may
begin to find areas for analysis or evaluation.

<figure id="fig-00002">

</figure>

# Restating, Analyzing, and Evaluating {#sect-00004}

To restate and then respond to a text, you need to both reread and
"resee" it, reconsidering its rhetorical situation and your reaction to
it. Be sure that you grasp the main ideas within the text but move
beyond that to a critical understanding of the text as a cultural
artifact. In responding, you start a conversation with the text so that
you enter into the framework and context of the communication. In
general, when responding to a text, you have to

understand what it means within its rhetorical situation;

analyze its meaning;

evaluate its significance; and

determine how to incorporate it into your own thinking and writing.

## Responding to Understand: Summary {#sect-00006}

A summary is a condensed version of a longer text that reviews its main
ideas. Shorter than the original text, a summary is written in your own
words. To prepare a summary, you may outline or annotate the text to
highlight relationships between ideas or conclusions. Reread sections of
the text such as abstracts, first and last paragraphs, and sections
titled "Summary," "Observations," or "Conclusion(s)." Also consider
headings, subheadings, and visuals, all of which often name main ideas.
Remember, you want to provide a summary in your own words of the
source's work, not your interpretation or opinion of it. Review this
video on [summarizing](#) for more information.

## Responding to Clarify: Paraphrase {#sect-00007}

A paraphrase is a restatement of a text or part of a text, written in
your own words, to clarify its meaning for your readers. A paraphrase is
usually about the same length as the original text, although it can be
either longer or shorter. Your goal in paraphrasing is to provide
readers with clarity about a complex idea while still maintaining the
perspective of the source. Paraphrasing can be difficult and requires
practice, so be sure to [review](#).

## Responding to Analyze {#sect-00008}

Responding to analyze means moving beyond a basic understanding and
appreciation of what the text *says* and examining it to see how it was
put together in order to deepen your comprehension. From thorough
analysis, you can arrive at your own theory regarding what the text
*means.* Thus, analysis leads to interpretation and to evaluation, or
judgment of its merits.

In responding to analyze, consider the following questions: *How has the
author constructed this text? What is the author's subject, tone, and
message or theme? For what reason or purpose has the author constructed
this text in this way at this time?* An analysis provides an
understanding of the ways in which the parts of the text form a whole
within a rhetorical situation. Any such response points to important
ideas and makes connections to provide textual evidence to support the
analysis.

To read a text analytically, mark it for

points of agreement and disagreement with claims or assertions;

convincing examples that support claims or assertions;

implications or consequences of believing the author;

personal associations with text material;

connections to other "texts" you have read;

recurring images, symbols, diction, phrases, ideas, and so on; and

conclusions.

Consider developing a coding system for cross-referencing to show that
one annotation, passage, or idea is related to another. Some students
write comments on different features of the text in different colors,
such as green for nature imagery, blue for key terms, red for
interesting anecdotes, and so on. Other students use numbers, such as 1
for plot, 2 for character, and so on.

Visit [Walden University](#) for more detail on including analysis in
your writing. You can also refer to [Rhetorical Analysis: Interpreting
the Art of Rhetoric](#) for more on rhetorical analysis and [Print or
Textual Analysis: What You Read](#) for more on print or textual
analysis.

## Responding to Evaluate {#sect-00009}

Responding to evaluate means deciding whether you think the text
accomplishes its purposes effectively. *In other words, does the text do
what it claims to do?* You can also determine the significance of the
text and its implications. Of course, different genres of texts should
be judged using different criteria. To evaluate a text, you need to
understand and analyze it in order to support your judgments.

In an argument, a writer (or speaker) advances claims and supports them
with logical reasoning and evidence. A claim is a statement that
something is true (or valid) or that some action should be taken. Every
claim in an argument should be supported by logical reasoning (e.g.,
cause and effect, comparison and contrast, or problem and solution) and
by reliable and sufficient evidence (e.g., facts, statistics, anecdotes,
examples, or quotations). When responding to an argument, ask the
following questions: *Is the claim based on presented
facts---information that can be verified? Is the claim based on credible
inferences---connections between textual evidence and personal knowledge
or experience? Is the claim based on unsubstantiated opinions---personal
belief?* All three elements---facts, inferences, and opinions---have
their places in argumentative texts. However, the strongest arguments
are those based on verifiable facts and reasonably drawn inferences.
Look out for opinions masquerading as facts and for inferences stemming
from insufficient facts. Refer to the social media exchange in the
[Annotated Student Sample](#) and recognize how those posts present
information to help you see these connections.

An informational text presents facts and draws conclusions based on
those facts. When responding to an informational text, ensure that the
facts are accurate, that the inferences rely on facts, and that opinions
presented as evidence are based on expertise, not emotion. Decide
whether the author presents enough reliable facts to justify the
conclusions. In addition, consider whether the author is reliable and
reasonable. Also, ask questions, such as *Is the tone objective? Has all
the relevant information been presented? Is the author an expert in the
field? What necessary or useful information seems missing? Are other
perspectives missing?*

To understand an informational text, you need some context for the new
ideas you encounter, some knowledge of the terms and ideas, and
knowledge of the rules that govern the genre. If would be difficult to
read the Emancipation Proclamation with no knowledge of the Civil War
(1861--1865) or the practice of enslavement. It would also be difficult
to read a biology textbook chapter about photosynthesis but know nothing
of plants, cell structure, or chemical reactions. The more you know, the
more you learn; the more you learn, the more critical your reading,
writing, and thinking will be. As you gain knowledge, you will naturally
ask more questions and make more connections or bridges between
information sources, thereby enhancing your reading, writing, and
critical thinking skills.

Many college instructors will ask you to read about subjects that are
new to you. First, of course, it's important to understand what you
read. Comprehension means being proactive as a reader: looking up words
you do not know, taking meaningful notes, asking questions,
understanding the rhetorical situation of the text, and so on. Second,
you want to improve your skills to analyze or evaluate texts critically
and write about this understanding. *However, how do you develop
context, learn background, and find the rules to help you read
unfamiliar texts on unfamiliar subjects? What strategies or shortcuts
can speed up the learning process?*

As an experiment, read the following statement issued by President Harry
S. Truman (1884--1972), take notes, and practice being a proactive
reader who focuses on comprehension, the rhetorical situation, and
critical analysis of the passage:

<figure id="fig-00003">

</figure>

Sixteen hours ago an American airplane dropped one bomb on Hiroshima,
Japan, and destroyed its usefulness to the enemy. That bomb had more
power than 20,000 tons of T.N.T. It had more than two thousand times the
blast power of the British Grand Slam, which is the largest bomb ever
yet used in the history of warfare.

*How did you do? Did your reasoning go something like this?*

Noting the setting---Hiroshima, Japan. Prior historical knowledge
suggests that Hiroshima is one of the cities on which the United States
dropped an atomic bomb near the end of

World War II

(1939--1945).

Staying with the first sentence,

Truman

focuses on Hiroshima as something useful to the enemy that has been
destroyed. There is no mention of human casualties.

The second sentence focuses on the destructive power of the bomb,
suggesting the force of the United States's arsenal.

Out of curiosity, you might have looked up the

British Grand Slam

to learn it was a powerful bomb type developed by engineer and inventor
Sir Barnes

Wallis

(1887--1979) and used during World War II. Here, too, Truman suggests
that the United States is even more powerful than its ally Great
Britain.

The tone of the text is prideful, as if using the largest bomb in the
history of warfare is a grand accomplishment.

Whether reading new texts, learning new information, or witnessing
unfamiliar events, you usually draw meaning by following a process
something like this one---trying to identify what you see, hear, or
read; questioning what you do not understand; making and testing
predictions; and consulting authorities for confirmation or credible
information. In this way, comprehension leads to critical analysis,
understanding, and evaluation.

You will encounter different text types, too. Authors of *literary
texts* such as short stories, poems, and plays may strive to make their
work believable, enjoyable, and effective in conveying their themes. To
locate a theme, look for recurring language, ideas, or images. Consider
how the characters change between the beginning and the end of the
story. Then, consider whether the author's choices effectively convey
the theme. The strongest responses to literature or other art forms are
based on textual evidence, as in most academic writing. Visit [Colorado
State University](#) for more insight into evaluation.

You also can refer to [Evaluation or Review: Would You Recommend It?](#)
for more on evaluation or review and [Print or Textual Analysis: What
You Read](#) for more direction in approaching narrative texts.

## Responding to Write {#sect-00010}

Once you understand a text, examine it more slowly to analyze and
evaluate its cultural assumptions, its arguments, its evidence, its
logic, and its conclusions. The best way to do this is to respond, or
"talk back," to the text in writing. Again, pay attention to the
rhetorical situation: the agents and conditions. Talking back can take
various forms, from actually saying words to yourself or aloud, to
making margin notes, to composing a critical response. Respond to
passages that cause you to pause for a moment to reflect, to question,
to read again, or to say "Ah!" or "Aha!" Your reactions may suggest
something important, maybe a revelation or an insight. Whichever it may
be, take note of it because you may not have that reaction on another
reading.

If the text is informational, try to capture the statements that are
repeated or that pull together or summarize ideas. These are often
critical elements to understand and possibly evaluate later. If the text
is argumentative, examine the claim, reasoning, and each piece of
supporting evidence. You can always go back to examine evidence or look
up sources the author used when you want to gain a better understanding
of the text's purpose and position in a larger conversation. If the text
is literary, pay extra attention to language features, such as images,
metaphors, and crisp dialogue. Often, authors use these elements to help
create a character, such as a character that always says "ya know" after
every sentence, thus making a character more individual and realistic.

Basically, you want to note what's happening to you as you read. Ask
about the text's effect on you. *How are you reacting? What are you
thinking or feeling? What do you like? What do you dislike? What do you
trust or distrust? Why?* These responses are useful especially if the
information is new or unexpected. By noting them, you will be able to
build your understanding and convey that to readers. Part of the goal as
a writer is to take the connections and bridges you have made and
provide them for *your* readers to help them follow the logic of those
connections.

Responding to a text in writing also means locating specific evidence to
quote, paraphrase, or summarize in support of your analysis or
evaluation. When you quote, you use the exact language of the text; when
you summarize, you reduce the text to a brief statement of its main
ideas in your own words; when you paraphrase, you restate the text in
your own words. In all these cases---quotation, summary, or
paraphrase---you will need to cite or reference the original source.
Proper and consistent citation is important for several reasons. It
helps establish your authority, thus building your credibility with
readers. It also allows readers to go to your sources for more details
or specifics so that they, too, can take part in the conversation. And
it shows you are crediting your sources, thus avoiding plagiarism. To
learn more about source citation, consult [MLA Documentation and
Format](#) or [APA Documentation and Format](#).

Use this media interactive to practice identifying the different ways in
which readers respond to texts. Then, examine the annotated professional
critical response model below.

## Critical Response: An Annotated Model {#sect-00005}

### The Case of Jean Gianini {#sect-00011}

In 1914, in the village of Poland, New York, sixteen-year-old Jean
Gianini murdered his former teacher Lydia Beecher. During the commission
of this brutal murder, Gianini provided evidence that tied him to the
murder through a lost a button at the crime scene. Upon arrest, Gianini
confessed to the crime. At the trial, Gianni's defense lawyers claimed
that Gianini was legally insane during the commission of his crime.
Psychologist Dr. Henry Herbert Goddard was called to testify as an
expert witness.

Here, as the author, Henry Herbert Goddard *(1866--1957)*, analyzes
*"The Case of Jean Gianini"* *(1915).* The selection that follows
demonstrates a framework and an example of a critical response to a
text. It has been excerpted for clarity and space.

### Introduction {#sect-00012}

In the introduction to his critical response, Goddard includes the title
of the work and a summary of the rhetorical situation. He ends the
introduction with a statement of evaluation.

"We find the defendant in this case not guilty as charged . . ."

Such was the verdict by the jury of the Supreme Court of Herkimer
County, New York, on May 28th, 1914, in the case of the people *vs.*
Jean Gianini, indicted for the murder of Lida Beecher, his former
teacher.

*Here, the author cites the title of the text---a court case---and
provides some early context.*

The prosecution and, at first at least, the majority of the citizens of
the community held that this had been a carefully planned, premeditated,
cold-blooded murder of the most atrocious character, committed with a
fiendishness seldom seen among human beings. It was, on the other hand,
claimed by the defense that the boy . . . had only the intelligence of a
ten-year-old child, that he did not know the nature and quality of his
act, and that he did not have any true realization of the enormity of
his crime. For some reason unaccountable to a great many people, the
jury accepted the view of the defense.

*Here, the author provides elements of the rhetorical situation:
culture, context, and stance. Shared cultural assumptions are that the
guilty will be punished. Contextual details of the trial include a
summary of the defense and the jury's reaction. The phrase
"unaccountable to a great many people" may suggest that the author does
not agree with the jury's "not guilty" verdict.*

Not infrequently have verdicts in murder trials been unacceptable to the
populace. In that respect this verdict is not an exceptional one, but
from other standpoints it is remarkable. Probably no verdict in modern
times has marked so great a step forward in society's treatment of the
wrongdoer. For the first time in history psychological tests of
intelligence have been admitted into court and the mentality of the
accused established on the basis of these facts.

The value of this verdict cannot be overestimated. It establishes a new
standard in criminal procedure.

*Here, the author offers commentary about the larger meaning of this
case, historically. In addition, the author concludes with a statement
of evaluation---the importance of the verdict to the administration of
justice.*

### Body {#sect-00013}

The next several body paragraphs provide Goddard with the opportunity to
offer the reasons behind his evaluation. Each paragraph should have a
topic sentence to maintain focus and organization. For each reason
offered, explanation of its importance and supporting evidence from the
text through quotations, summaries, or paraphrases should follow. See
[MLA Documentation and Format](#) or [APA Documentation and Format](#)
for guidance on citation.

One of the unique features, so far as court procedure is concerned, was
the introduction into the case, of examinations by means of the
Binet-Simon Measuring Scale of Intelligence.

*In this passage, the author gives one reason to support both his and
the jury's assessment of Jean's intelligence---an intelligence test.
Moreover, it is presented as a new scientific tool, which it was in
1915, to help establish the case.*

The writer's examination of Jean consisted largely of the use of these
tests, and as a result he estimated his mentality at approximately ten
years of age. It was somewhat difficult to estimate his mentality with
the usual exactness since others had already used the tests, and it was
impossible to say how much Jean had learned from his previous
examinations. As a matter of fact, in some cases at least, he had not
profited by the experiences which should have helped him greatly \[. .
.\] For example, one of the tests is to draw from memory a diagram which
he has been allowed to study for ten seconds. It is clear that if one
were given this test two or three times, at the last trial he should
have a pretty good idea of it and be able to draw it correctly. Although
the writer's use of this test was in the last of the series of those who
tested him, yet he did not succeed in drawing it. This is usually drawn
by a child of ten years. When asked to repeat a certain sentence, he
replied, "Oh, I have been asked that a hundred times." But in spite of
the fact that he had heard it several times he failed to remember it,
and yet this sentence is generally remembered by a child of twelve.

*Here, the author introduces evidence from the test through summary.
Yet, he employs some faulty cause-and-effect reasoning. Based on Jean's
response to repeating a sentence, is it possible that he* refuses *to
participate in the tests rather than that he is* unable *to produce the
desired responses? By not considering alternative conclusions (or
perspectives), the author shows a bias against Jean and favoritism
toward the test and the conclusion he draws from it.*

### Conclusion {#sect-00014}

To conclude, Goddard shares with readers his final thoughts about the
text and leaves the readers with something to think about.

Our general studies have not yet gone far enough, and certainly our
study of this particular family is far from sufficient, to enable us to
decide whether this is a matter of heredity or whether we shall say that
Jean's condition as well as that of the first child is traceable
directly to the mother's insanity or to her alcoholism.

For the present purpose, of course, it does not matter. We see in these
facts, whether we regard them as causes or merely as symptoms of a
deeper lying cause, sufficient reason for Jean's \[intellectual
condition. \[. . .\] The next important question that arises is a legal
one of whether \[. . .\] he knew the nature and quality of his act and
that it was wrong.

*Finally, the author introduces subsequent (and maybe distracting)
information. Additionally, the author concedes to the popular assessment
of Jean's mental condition, but he raises a legal question that prompts
readers to continue thinking: Does one's intellectual capacity excuse
one from criminal culpability*?

Now, it is your turn to put this knowledge to work. Use a graphic
organizer like [\#](#) to get started drafting your ideas in response to
your chosen text.

+-----------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
| Structure of Response | Content of Response          | Your Response |
+=======================+==============================+===============+
| Introduction          | Author                       |               |
|                       |                              |               |
|                       | Title of Work                |               |
|                       |                              |               |
|                       | Summary of rhetorical        |               |
|                       | situation                    |               |
|                       |                              |               |
|                       | Statement of analysis or     |               |
|                       | evaluation                   |               |
+-----------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
| Body 1                | Point 1 of analysis or       |               |
|                       | evaluation                   |               |
|                       |                              |               |
|                       | Evidence from text in form   |               |
|                       | of quotation, summary, or    |               |
|                       | paraphrase                   |               |
+-----------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
| Body 2                | Point 2 of analysis or       |               |
|                       | evaluation                   |               |
|                       |                              |               |
|                       | Evidence from text in form   |               |
|                       | of quotation, summary, or    |               |
|                       | paraphrase                   |               |
+-----------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
| Body 3                | Point 3 of analysis or       |               |
|                       | evaluation                   |               |
|                       |                              |               |
|                       | Evidence from text in form   |               |
|                       | of quotation, summary, or    |               |
|                       | paraphrase                   |               |
+-----------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
| Body 4 (if needed)    | Point 4 of analysis or       |               |
|                       | evaluation                   |               |
|                       |                              |               |
|                       | Evidence from text in form   |               |
|                       | of quotation, summary, or    |               |
|                       | paraphrase                   |               |
+-----------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
| Body 5 (if needed)    | Point 5 of analysis or       |               |
|                       | evaluation                   |               |
|                       |                              |               |
|                       | Evidence from text in form   |               |
|                       | of quotation, summary, or    |               |
|                       | paraphrase                   |               |
+-----------------------+------------------------------+---------------+
| Conclusion            | Final conclusions regarding  |               |
|                       | analysis or evaluation       |               |
|                       |                              |               |
|                       | Leave readers thinking or    |               |
|                       | suggest action               |               |
+-----------------------+------------------------------+---------------+

: Drafting frame {#table-00001}

In addition, use these sentence starters as needed during drafting:

*Summary*:

\[Name of author\] explains \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

After discussing \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, the author claims \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

\[Author's name\]'s main point is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

*Paraphrase:*

In other words, the author is saying that \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

To paraphrase, the author claims that \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

To simplify this idea, think about it in this way: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

*Analysis*:

\[Name of author\] develops \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ to show \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The author's use of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ supports \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The author employs \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ to create \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

*Evaluation*:

The most important aspect of this text is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ because
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

\[Name of author\] fails to address \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, which makes me think about the impact on
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

I think \[name of author\] is wrong \[or correct\] because
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

*Evidence:*

As an example, the author says, "\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_." *(Be sure to provide
accurate citation!)*

The sentence "\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_" suggests that \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

The use of the word "\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_" creates the impression that
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.

As often as possible, use the author's name rather than a pronoun. The
first time you mention it, write the full name as it is listed on the
source you are using. Then, use the last name only, and be certain to
cite properly. Finally, edit and revise your work to catch any
oversights.
