m00017

6f6deed6-dca7-4286-b884-68ff1fc7bd49

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Determine how various mediums address, affect, and interact with a range
of audiences.

Examine the importance of your college experience and larger impact on
society.

Write and post texts in different environments and in varying rhetorical
situations.

# The Role of the Classroom in This Brave New World {#sect-00002}

The term *academia* refers to "the life, community, or environment of
teachers, schools, and education." With the advent of the COVID-19
pandemic in 2020, the world of academia was challenged. There were
logistical challenges, of course: *How would students and teachers
attend classes and remain safe? In what ways could digital learning
replace classroom learning effectively?* But there were deeper
philosophical challenges: *What is the real value of a traditional
college education in a world that is seemingly on the brink of one
crisis after another? Would the classroom become something of value,
leading the way in this brave new world, or would it become obsolete?*
While some students chose not to return to their classrooms in the fall
of 2020, others either returned or logged on virtually. Whichever way
students decided to engage, the larger purpose of college was
challenged.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

At its best, the college experience is one of personal transformation.
The student embarks on a journey of empowerment, learning to understand
the world around them, then to participate in it, and finally to
influence it. It is a journey from understanding to analysis and from
evaluation to problem-solving. The final awarding of a degree calls a
student to action. *What will you do with the newly gained knowledge and
practiced skill sets? How will you make an impact the world in positive
ways? Will you develop the vaccine for the next health threat? Will you
address centuries of racial injustice in ways never before attempted?
What unique contribution can only you make at this time and in this
place?* The question is not really whether the college classroom has a
role to play in this world, but whether it will rise above outdated
traditions to the level of impactful engagement. One thing is certain,
however; the answer starts with you and the publication of your ideas.

# Authentic Publication {#sect-00003}

To practice your knowledge and use some of the tools in your growing
skill set, do this short activity. If you have a social media account,
use it to bridge social media and academia by publishing a version of
your critical response that meets the characteristics of the platform,
likely by reducing the character count or posting a video. First,
summarize or paraphrase your main points. Research a link you might
include to provide readers with background information and a larger
context of your rhetorical situation. Next, create a post that asks an
honest, analytical, or evaluative question about the topic. In
determining your phrasing, assess the rhetorical situation. If you can,
tag a few of your followers to encourage them to respond. You might even
mention that this is part of a school project or add a hashtag---a word
or phrase preceded by \# that categorizes the accompanying text. If you
are on multiple platforms, try different versions or approaches to see
which one generates the most attention and discussion.

As a result, you might learn something compelling or find your interest
piqued by engaging with others. Maybe you can even incorporate what you
learn into your portfolio reflection, which is covered at the end of
this chapter. Remember, part of the goal of writing is learning. Writing
helps you solidify what you are thinking, what it might mean, why it
matters, how to say it, and how to communicate it to others. Using
various media to convey information will continue to be an essential
element of your education and your life, so be sure to practice it.
