m00018

88eb0fc4-6144-4c92-84ff-56f8f811e4f7

# Learning Outcomes {#sect-00001}

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

Reflect on the development of composing processes.

Reflect on how those composing processes affect your work.

<figure id="fig-00001">

</figure>

# The Portfolio: And So It Begins . . . {#sect-00002}

In simplest terms, a writing portfolio is a collection of your writing
contained within a single binder or folder. This writing may have been
done over a number of weeks, months, or even years. It may be organized
chronologically, thematically, or according to quality. A private
writing portfolio may contain writing that you wish to keep only for
yourself. In this case, you decide what is in it and what it looks like.
However, a writing portfolio assigned for a class will contain writing
to be shared with an audience to demonstrate the growth of your writing
and reasoning abilities. One kind of writing portfolio, accumulated
during a college course, presents a record of your work over a semester,
and your instructor may be use it to assign a grade. Another type of
portfolio presents a condensed, edited story of your semester's progress
in a more narrative form.

The most common type of portfolio assigned in a writing course combines
the cumulative work collected over the semester, plus a cover letter in
which you explain the nature and value of these papers. Sometimes you
will be asked to assign yourself a grade on the basis of your own
assessment. The following suggestions may help you prepare a course
portfolio:

Make your portfolio speak for you.

If your course portfolio is clean, complete, and carefully organized,
that is how it will be judged. If it is unique, colorful, creative, and
imaginative, that, too, is how it will be judged. Similarly, your folder
will be judged more critically if it is messy, incomplete, and
haphazardly put together. Before giving your portfolio to somebody else
for evaluation, consider whether it reflects how you want to be
presented.

Include exactly what is asked for.

If an instructor wants three finished papers and a dozen sample journal
entries, that is the minimum your course portfolio should contain.
Sometimes you can include more than what is asked for, but never include
less.

Add supplemental material judiciously.

Course portfolios are among the most flexible means of presenting
yourself. If you believe that supplemental writing will show you in a
better light, include that too, but only after the required material. If
you include extra material, attach a memo to explain why it is there and
what you think it adds to your portfolio. Supplemental writing might
include journals, letters, sketches, or diagrams that suggest other
useful dimensions of your thinking.

Include

perfect

final drafts.

At least make them as close to perfect as you can. Show that your own
standard for finished work is high. Check spelling, grammar, citation,
formatting, and font sizes and types. You should go over your work
carefully and be able to find the smallest errors. In addition, if you
are asked for a hard copy of your portfolio, final drafts should be
double-spaced and printed on only one side of high-quality paper, unless
another format is requested. And, of course, your work should be
carefully proofread and should follow the language and genre conventions
appropriate to the task.

Demonstrate growth.

This is a tall order, but course portfolios, unlike most other
assessment instruments, can show positive change. The primary value of
portfolios in writing classes is that they allow you to demonstrate how
a finished paper came into being. Consequently, instructors frequently
ask for early drafts to be attached to final drafts of each paper, the
most recent on top, so they can see how you followed revision
suggestions, how much effort you invested, how many drafts you wrote,
and how often you took risks and tried to improve. To build such a
record of your work, make sure the date of every draft is clearly marked
on each one, and keep it in a safe place (and backed up electronically).

Demonstrate work in progress.

Course portfolios allow writers to present partially finished work that
suggests future directions and intentions. Both instructors and
potential employers may find such preliminary drafts or outlines as
valuable as some of your finished work. When you include a tentative
draft, be sure to attach a memo or note explaining why you still believe
it has merit and in which direction you plan to take your next
revisions.

Attach a table of contents.

For portfolios containing more than three papers, attach a separate
table of contents. For those containing only a few papers, embed your
table of contents in the cover letter.

Organize your work using clear logic.

Three methods of organization are particularly appealing:

Chronological order

:

Writing is arranged in order, beginning with the first week of class and
ending with the last week, with all drafts, papers, journal entries,
letters, and such fitting in place according to the date written. Only
the cover letter is out of chronological order, appearing at the
beginning and serving as an introduction to what follows. This method
allows you to show the evolution of growth most clearly, with your
latest writing (presumably the best) presented at the end.

Reverse chronological order

:

The most recent writing is up front, and the earliest writing at the
back. In this instance, the most recent written document---the cover
letter---is in place at the beginning of the portfolio. This method
features your latest (presumably the best) work up front and allows
readers to trace the history of how it got there.

Best-first order

:

You place your strongest writing up front and your weakest in back.
Organizing a portfolio this way suggests that the work

you

consider strongest should count most heavily in evaluating the
semester's work.

With each completed chapter in this textbook, you will add to this
portfolio. As you work through the chapters and complete the
assignments, save each one on your computer or in the cloud, unless your
instructor asks you to print your work and arrange it in a binder. Each
assignment becomes an artifact that will form a piece of your portfolio.
Depending on your preference or your instructor's approach, you may
write a little about each assignment as you add to the portfolio. As you
compile your portfolio, take some time to read the assignments---drafts
and finished products---carefully. Undoubtedly, you will see improvement
in your writing over a short amount of time. Be sure to make note of
this improvement because it will prove useful moving forward.

# Reflective Task: The Freedom of Freewriting {#sect-00003}

As you begin your portfolio with the addition of your critical response,
compose an accompanying freewrite, sometimes called a quick write. In
this case, you will be responding to your own text---a powerful tool in
your intellectual development. To begin, write quickly and without
stopping about the process of composing your critical response and the
finished product. See where your thoughts go, a process that often helps
you clarify your own thoughts about the subject---your own text and its
creation. When you freewrite, write to yourself in your own natural
style, without worrying about sentence structure, grammar, spelling, or
punctuation. The purpose is to help you tie together the ideas from your
writing process, your assignment, and other thoughts and experiences in
your mind. One future value of freewriting is that the process tends to
generate questions at random, capture them, and leave the answering for
a later task or assignment. Another bonus of freewriting is that you
will build confidence with writing and become more disciplined when you
have to write. In other words, the more you write, the more confidence
you will have in your voice and your writing.

By now you may have realized that writing, whether on social media
platforms or in the classroom, is a conversation. The conversation may
take place with yourself (freewriting), with your instructor and
classmates (assignment), or with the world (social media). You have
learned how people like Selena Gomez and others use simple and effective
strategies, such as vulnerability, understanding, analysis, and
evaluation, to engage in such conversations. Now adopt these same
processes---try them on for size, practice them, and learn to master
them. As you move through the remainder of this course and text, compose
with intention by keeping in mind the limits and freedoms of a
particular defined rhetorical situation.

# Further Reading {#sect-00004}

It's a good idea to familiarize yourself with texts of evaluation and
analysis. Below, you will find a few titles with which to start.

Boyd, Danah. "Wikipedia as a Source of Knowledge Production." *It's
Complicated: The Social Lives of Networked Teens,* Yale UP, 2014, pp.
765--770.

Bradford, Clare. "'Where Happily Ever After Happens Every Day': The
Medievalisms of Disney's Princesses." *The Disney Middle Ages*, Palgrave
Macmillan, 2012, pp. 171--188, doi:10.1057/9781137066923_10.

Miller, Matthew. "Runner-Up: Frost's Broken Roads." *W. W. Norton*,
wwnorton.com/norton-writers-prize/2017-winners/runner-up:-frosts-broken-roads.

Thorne, William. "Movie Review: 'The Circle.'" *Daily Bruin*, 28 Apr.
2017, dailybruin.com/2017/04/28/movie-review-the-circle.

Ulrich, Laurel Thatcher. *Well-Behaved Women Seldom Make History*.
Alfred A. Knopf, 2008.

Wise, Sean. "5 Social Media Moves That Prove Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Is
the Queen of Digital Emotional Intelligence." *Inc.*, 20 Feb. 2019,
https://www.inc.com/sean-wise/5-social-media-moves-that-prove-alexandria-ocasio-cortez-is-queen-of-digital-emotional-intelligence.html.

# Works Cited {#sect-00007}

Goddard, Henry Herbert. *The Criminal Imbecile*. 1915. Project
Gutenberg, 2013,
http://www.gutenberg.org/files/43064/43064-h/43064-h.htm.

Okwodu, Janelle. "Selena Gomez Wants Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter to
Do Better." *Vogue*, 7 Jan. 2021,
www.vogue.com/article/selena-gomez-social-media-leaders.

Park, Sabrina. "Selena Gomez Reveals Why She Sacrificed Social Media for
the Sake of Her Mental Health." *Harper's Bazaar*, 19 Aug. 2021,
www.harpersbazaar.com/celebrity/latest/a37348873/selena-gomez-mental-health-giving-up-instagram/.

Cunningham, John M. "Selena Gomez." *Encyclopædia Britannica*, updated
30 Aug. 2021, www.britannica.com/biography/Selena-Gomez.

The Manhattan Engineer District, United States Army. *The Atomic
Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki*. 1946. Project Gutenberg, 2008,
www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/685/pg685.html.

Walansky, A. "Selena Gomez Opens Up About the Dangers (and Value) of
Social Media." *Goalcast*, 18 Nov. 2019,
www.goalcast.com/selena-gomez-reflects-on-the-danger-and-value-of-social-media/amp/.
